PRODUCT MANAGEMENT FOR UX PEOPLE
From Designing to Thriving in a Product World
by CHRISTIAN CRUMLISH foreword by Matt LeMay



Christian Crumlish
NEW YORK 2022
PRODUCT MANAGEMENT FOR
UX PEOPLE
FROM DESIGNING TO THRIVING IN A PRODUCT WORLD



“This is the book to read if you’re thinking of a career transition from
UX to product. You’ll find out more about what you’ll get (decision-
making power) and what you’ll lose (your idealism and purity).”
—Ellen Chisa,
Founder-in-Residence, Boldstart Ventures
“Finally, a book that zooms into the Venn diagram between product
management and UX with day-in-the life clarity.”
—Hà Phan,
UX designer turned director of product
“Filled with wisdom from Crumlish and other experts in the business
aspects of product development, this book teaches UX designers
what to expect from PMs and encourages them to become one.”
—Peter Boersma,
DesignOps manager, Miro
“Christian lights the way for folks in UX to successfully navigate
the world of product management. A must-read for any serious UX
practitioner.”
—Clement Kao,
CEO, product teacher
“Too few books think through the synergies as well as complexi-
ties of transitioning from UX to product. This one finally looks at
those nuances and provides a straightforward roadmap on what
skills translate and where there are opportunities to learn a great
deal more.”
—B. Pagels-Minor,
product and thought leader

Product Management for UX People
From Designing to Thriving in a Product World
By Christian Crumlish
Rosenfeld Media, LLC
125 Maiden Lane
New York, New York 10038
USA
On the Web: www.rosenfeldmedia.com
Please send errata to: errata@rosenfeldmedia.com
Publisher: Louis Rosenfeld
Managing Editor: Marta Justak
Interior Layout: Danielle Foster
Cover Design: Heads of State
Illustrator: Danielle Foster
Indexer: Marilyn Augst
Proofreader: Sue Boshers
© 2022 Christian Crumlish
All Rights Reserved
ISBN: 1-933820-71-3
ISBN 13: 978-1-933820-71-2
LCCN: 2021949229
Printed and bound in the United States of America

To Briggs, my North Star, who makes everything possible

vi
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
Who Should Read This Book?
Read this book if you are:
• A UX practitioner or manager considering a transition to product
management (or other product leadership roles) for professional
or career reasons
• A UX person working on a product team and trying to learn how
to function best in that context
• A product manager or product leader who wants to better
understand the UX people you work with, what they have to
contribute, and how best to leverage their talents
If you’re a UX professional, who is curious about product manage-
ment, you’ll learn how your skills apply to a product role and get
more insight into whether you might want to pursue this career
direction. You will also come away with a better understanding of
the worldview and priorities of product managers and how best to
collaborate with them and build healthy product development teams.
You’ll learn whether the product role really offers you the career
advancement or growth you are seeking with the benefit of a clear-
eyed assessment of the pros and cons of product management
work vs. UX.
If you’re unsure of your career plans, you’ll come away with a better
sense of whether this direction is one you want to pursue. If you are
already committed to becoming a product manager or leader, you
will have a recipe to follow for preparing yourself and executing
the transition.
For people who are already product managers and other tech profes-
sionals, you will gain insight into the perspectives of UX designers
and managers and will likewise come away with models for how to
work with them better and how to build stronger product teams.

How to Use This Book vii
What’s in This Book?
In this book, you will learn what product management means and
what product managers do. You’ll get a sense of whether product
management sounds like something you want to do yourself. You’ll
find out exactly which of your hard-won UX skills have prepared you
for product work and where the gaps are.
You’ll learn how product managers work with engineers and take
responsibility for business outcomes. You’ll get a sense of how prod-
uct managers work with data and metrics, how to run experiments,
and how to optimize revenue and deal with money.
You will also learn how product and UX practitioners and teams
can work effectively together, how to make difficult choices between
competing priorities, and how to say No to stakeholder, up to and
including your boss. Finally, you’ll learn how product management
leadership works and how you can become the boss.
What Comes with This Book?
This book’s companion website ( rosenfeldmedia.com/books/
product-management-for-ux-people) contains a blog and additional
content. The book’s diagrams and other illustrations are available
under a Creative Commons license (when possible) for you to down-
load and include in your own presentations. You can find these on
Flickr at www.flickr.com/photos/rosenfeldmedia/sets/.
Readers of the book are welcome to join the author’s Design in
Product community to further discuss these topics. To do so, just sign
up at https://designinproduct.typeform.com/to/H4PqHsVE.

viii
FREQUENTLY ASKED
QUESTIONS
Can I become a product manager and continue
to do a lot of design work every day?
Unlikely. Maybe in a small start-up where they need you to do two
jobs at once, but product managers are not designers and the day-
to-day work of the two roles differs significantly, as explained in
Chapter 2, despite the large overlapping areas of shared concern.
Do UX people make good product managers?
They absolutely can. It’s no guarantee, but the best product managers
I’ve worked with had a sophisticated understanding of user experi-
ence research, strategy, and design principles, an abiding obsession
with the needs of customers and other users, and a deep respect for
UX practitioners. Chapter 3 identifies some of the key UX strengths
the provide a strong foundation for product success.
If I become a PM, will it mean that I can boss
around the engineers (finally)?
Not really, but you cannot succeed as a product manager without
learning how to effectively organize and focus the efforts of your
colleagues on the engineering team. Chapter 4 explains how you can
use your UX “superpowers” to become your developers’ best ally.
Is “growth hacking” the enemy of good user
experience?
Kinda. Certainly the cancerous “growth for its own sake” ethos
driven by capitalism and its Silicon Valley derivative, venture capital-
ism, makes short shrift of most UX ideals, but “growth” itself is not a
dirty word. Every organism must learn how to grow if it is to thrive.
See Chapter 6 for a rundown on how to optimize your product’s
growth in a healthy way.

Frequently Asked Questions ix
Are product and UX teams always stuck in
turf wars?
No, but poorly designed org structures and weakly articulated role
responsibilities from leadership are a recipe for conflict, strife, and
wasted effort. This is why, whatever side of the table you sit on,
you need to negotiate the gray areas and the distinctions between
“involved” and “has the final say” for each critical aspect of the work,
as discussed in Chapter 9.
How many information architects does a product
leadership team need?
At least one, as explained in Chapter 11.

x
CONTENTS
How to Use This Book vi
Frequently Asked Questions viii
Foreword xv
Introduction xvi
CHAPTER 1
What Exactly Does a Product Manager Do? 1
Product Management Is Responsible for Value 2
A Product Manager Is Not a Project Manager 4
A Product Manager Is Not a Product Owner 4
Where Did Product Managers Come From? 5
Three Other Traits Shared by All Great
Product Managers 15
So What Does a PM Do? 15
Key Insights 16
CHAPTER 2
Do You Want to Be a Product Manager? 17
Why a Product Manager? 18
So, Are These Good Reasons? 24
But What Exactly Do Ya Do Here? 24
A Typical Day 27
What If You Don’t Want to Be a Product
Manager After All? 29
Key Insights 30
CHAPTER 3
UX Skills That Carry Over 31
How PM Differs from UX 32
UX vs. Product Skills Histogram 37
Information Architecture 43

Contents xi
Intense Customer Satisfaction 45
Solving Problems Through Iterative Design 47
Leading Through Influence 48
Product Managers Are from Mars . . . 49
Key Insights 50
CHAPTER 4
Wrangling Engineers 51
Keep Engineering Teams Aligned 52
What’s Your Definition of “Done”? 60
Iterative Process Improvement Through
Retrospectives 62
Getting Results from Engineers 63
Estimation and Negotiation 65
Key Insights 68
CHAPTER 5
The Business of Product Is Business 69
Build Sustainable Value 70
Thinking in Terms of the Market 70
Targeting a Market 71
Finding Product-Market Fit 74
What Is the Go-to-Market Plan? 77
Customer Obsession 79
Launching vs. Optimizing 80
Business Operations 81
Financial Business Skills 82
Business-to-Business (B2B) Products 83
Key Insights 86

xii Contents
CHAPTER 6
Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Reten-
tion 87
Living in the Data 88
Funnel Optimization 90
Growth Metrics 95
Growing Your User Base like a Pirate 96
Two Cautions 103
Key Insights 106
CHAPTER 7
Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 107
Experimentation as a Way of Life 108
Build vs. Fix vs. Tune 109
Defining Hypotheses 109
Proposing and Prioritizing Experiments 111
How to Run an A/B Test 116
Beyond A/B Tests 120
Key Insights 127
CHAPTER 8
Getting the Money 129
Profit and Loss 130
Revenue Models 131
Breaking Even 133
Revenue Lifecycles 145
What’s Money Without Customers or
Transactions? 147
Key Insights 148

Contents xiii
CHAPTER 9
Healthy Collaborative Tension on the Prod-
uct UX
The Overlap and Its Disconnects 150
Where Do You Draw the Line? 152
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly 154
Where in the Org Chart? 157
When You’re Not a Designer Anymore 158
Being a Hybrid 159
Key Insights 161
Superfriends 161
CHAPTER 10
Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 163
Defining the Roadmap 164
Feasible Horizons: Now, Next, Later 166
Product Strategy 168
Prioritization 171
Populating and Maintaining the Roadmap 179
Epilogue to the “Break-Even” Story 181
The Art of Saying No 182
Key Insights 187
CHAPTER 11
Chief Information Architect 189
The Head of Product’s Secret Sauce 190
Be a Boss 193
Selling Your Team’s Services Internally as a Product 196
Building Product Teams 199
Investing in Your Team 201
Key Insights 203
Someone Has to Lead—Why Not You? 203

xiv Contents
Index 205
Acknowledgments 217
About the Author 222

xv
FOREWORD
T
here’s a particular sparkle I’ve often seen in the eyes of UX
professionals who are considering a pivot to product man-
agement. In many cases, this is the sparkle of a redemption
narrative in the making: “I’m sick of other product managers not
understanding the value and importance of UX, and when I become
a product manager, I’ll treat my whole team with respect and elevate
UX to a more strategic position!”
Cut to a year later, and that sparkle has usually faded. The reality
of product management—with its deadlines, estimates, high-stakes
decisions, and high-pressure stakeholders—inevitably complicates
your best-laid plans and purest ambitions. Slowly but surely, you
start to realize why some of the product managers you’ve worked
with were “like that.” And, with the right real-world guidance, you
are able to navigate the complex realities of product management
while building on the user-centric superpowers you developed as a
UX person.
Product Management for UX People provides that very guidance. Chris-
tian Crumlish has lived through the transition from UX to product
management, and is unerringly generous and candid in sharing both
his experiences and those of other folks whose work has bridged the
worlds of product and UX. Here, you’ll find compelling real-world
stories of the highs, the lows, and (mostly) the relentless ambiguous
middles of product management. And, best of all, you’ll learn how
your experience as a UX person can help you be the kind of product
manager you want to see in the world.
As you read this book, you will experience moments of far-flung
inspiration, somber realization, deep reflection, and anxious-yet-
steely resolve. If that doesn’t capture the day-to-day reality of life as a
product manager, I don’t know what does.
—Matt LeMay, partner at Sudden Compass and author of Product
Management in Practice and Agile for Everybody

xvi
INTRODUCTION
“Why is a product manager telling me what to do?”
Most user experience professionals remember the first time they
found themselves working with a product manager: in a meeting—
for a new job—at a bigger company—in a different vertical—at a
start-up—or for a reorg.
But however it happened, something was new and different. Who was
this person in the meeting talking about “the product” and speaking
for UX?
“That’s the product manager, shhh.”
One of the designers on your team said they would fill you in later,
but gave you this tidbit—it turns out that UX reports to product here.
OK, but what does that mean? Who does what? Does this project — no,
wait, product—manager make the wireframes and then just hand them
over to the designers to “color them in” and “make them pretty?”
And who has the final say on the product’s user experience?
What even is a product manager? These days, that depends on who
the person is, where the job is, and how the role is being executed.
Finally, what do UX practitioners need to know about product?
NOTE WHAT PRODUCT MEANS
Product managers tend to use the word product (by itself) as a
shorthand for product management. Shortening it like this is a
deliberate choice not to lean into that ambiguous management
part. The term product is also used by itself to denote product
thinking in general (the entire realm or topic of product stuff,
including product design, product development, product market-
ing, and so on).
Before we plunge in, let’s run through the ritual liturgy. How do
product and UX relate to each other, how do they work well together,
and what is the “correct” relationship between product and UX?
It depends.

Introduction xvii
OK, with that out of the way, from here on, I’ll cite specific examples
(thinly disguised if need be, or generalized if it’s a ubiquitous pat-
tern) so that you can plot your own mental model for where product
fits into the UX worldview (and vice versa).
Let’s start by rewinding a bunch of years . . .
Ten Years Ago I Took This Workshop . . .
A little over ten years ago, I was a staff interaction designer at Yahoo
and curator of the legendary design pattern library there (my busi-
ness card read Pattern Detective). My boss, Erin Malone, was a senior
director of UED (user experience design) on the platform design team.
Later, I co-authored a book with her on social experience design.
We were presenting at the Information Architecture Summit together
that year and when we saw there was a workshop about product
management for user experience designers (taught by Jeff Lash and
Chris Baum), we both jumped at the chance to sign up, I suspect for
similar reasons.
You see, at Yahoo, UED reported to something called “the product
org.” All the technical work at the company was delivered in col-
laboration with the product sector and the engineering group. These
two behemoths were locked in an endless battle for ascendancy that
happened at all levels, up and down the line and across the company.
Our platform design team was actually in the tech org, but even
there, UED had to work with and accommodate the demands of
product management. (In fact, I was vetoed for the first job Erin
recruited me to take on by a product manager who worried I was
“too senior” and wouldn’t be satisfied just cranking out mocks based
on his wireframes.)
But more importantly, Yahoo, as a whole, treated user experience
design (and research) as an arm of product. This was all new to
me. I had cut my teeth in the independent, art-oriented web of the
1990s, building websites for clients in freelance, agency, and consult-
ing contexts. These sites were not products. They sold products,

xviii Introduction
or advertised them, or promoted them. A big part of the appeal
of Yahoo was getting closer to making functional experiences for
people to engage with and getting out of the business of building
microsites and revamping home pages and site navigation for various
brick-and-mortar businesses.
So this idea that we were making a product, and that product people
governed our work, made a big impression on me, and Jeff and
Chris’s workshop provided a great opportunity to learn more about
the habits and drives of product people. It also left me with the seed
of a new passion.
If You Can’t Beat ’Em . . .
Another moment that made a huge impression on me was the day
Larry Cornett went from being the VP of User Experience Design
for the Yahoo Search product to being the VP of Product for that
same team.
“You can do that!?” It was a revelation for me.
It was a few more years before I followed them over to what a lot of
UX designers still refer to as “the dark side”—project management.
Did I become one of the oppressors? Do you have to switch teams to
get ahead or to influence product strategy? Or can product and UX
join forces as “superfriends”? Those are some of the questions I’ll
cover in this book.

CHAPTER 1
What Exactly
Does a Product
Manager Do?
Product Management Is Responsible for Value 2
A Product Manager Is Not a Project Manager 4
A Product Manager Is Not a Product Owner 4
Where Did Product Managers Come From? 5
Three Other Traits Shared by All Great Product Managers 15
So What Does a PM Do? 15
Key Insights 16

2 Chapter 1
I
f you’re not sure what product managers do, you’re not alone.
Quite a few hiring managers — not to mention entire busi-
nesses — are also confused about this job title and what exactly
it means. It doesn’t help that there are a wide variety of legitimate
approaches to product management that tend to emphasize one or
another of the constituent proficiencies at the expense of the others.
As confusing as this may seem, there are multiple legitimate
approaches to product management in practice today, because the
work itself depends so heavily on context. That being said, every
product manager has the same core responsibility: value.
Product Management Is Responsible
for Value
The product manager is responsible for value, through the coordina-
tion and delivery of customer experiences, and for making sure that
the experience being delivered to customers (and other stakeholders)
provides enough value to be “hired” by the user and developed as a
sustainable concern, ideally in service of a broader vision.
OK, but sustainable in what sense? It’s a broad goal. LinkedIn product
lead and social change evangelist B. Pagels-Minor suggested at least
one dimension of this: “Something the user values and repeatedly
uses.” In addition to that, for a system of any kind, business or
otherwise, to become sustainable, it needs to find repeatable cycles of
inputs and outcomes that literally keep the system going. Some of the
inputs, usually those related to people or money, need to be at least
steady and consistent, if not growing, Whatever you’re building has
to keep these cycles flowing.
So think of it this way: any sustaining value to the organization is
derived by taking a fair share of the value created for the “customer”
(or end user, subject, actor, protagonist).
Responsibility for value helps clarify a few roles that are often
confused with product managers: project managers and product owners.
Before digging into the building blocks of product management, let’s
first get those different titles defined and distinguished.

What Exactly Does a Product Manager Do? 3
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
WHAT WE TALK ABOUT WHEN WE TALK
ABOUT VALUE
The first person who taught me to focus on “value” as the lodestar
of product management was Jay Zaveri, who was my chief product
officer at the time, at a start-up called CloudOn, and now runs a
product incubator at Social Capital, a VC firm in Palo Alto.
I checked back with him because when people ask what defines
value, it’s hard to avoid circularity of the “you know it when you
see it variety.” Some people emphasize value to the whole system
vs. monetary value, or value that accrues to the owner of the orga-
nization alone. However, Jay put it this way: “Value is something
special that a person or customer experiences that never existed
in the same way for them in the past — it’s a product that is useful,
usable, and desirable. Value fulfills a deep need, desire, or want
for the customer that they did not even know existed. It’s apparent
when something is technologically differentiated (‘cheaper, faster,
better’), abundantly available (‘accessible in a way that was only
available to few before’), and changes human behavior (in a way
that is beneficial to the person or customer).”
When asked who gets this value, he said, “I think people get
confused by adding financial metrics as value metrics. Some of
those are necessary, but not sufficient, and some are pure garbage.
No true value is created by just financial and growth metrics; in
fact, we now know there are serious unintended consequences if
you are focused only on them. Nothing beats staying focused on
true value to your customer — everyone wins!”

4 Chapter 1
A Product Manager Is Not a
Project Manager
Product managers are frequently mixed up with project managers. Even
people who know the difference will occasionally confuse them in
speech. Abbreviations are no help, as both are commonly referred
to as PMs with only context making the meaning clear. (Sometimes
that context is “this company doesn’t have any project managers” or
vice versa; other times, it’s based on the speaker, the team, and the
conversation itself.)
NOTE IN THIS BOOK, PM MEANS PRODUCT MANAGER
Forget PrM or ProM, too, as potential abbreviations—still no dis-
tinguishing characters. And I haven’t met anyone yet who wants
to go around calling them ProjMs and ProdMs, or PjMs and PdMs
for that matter. In this book, PM stands for product manager.
To make things worse, project management can be one of the respon-
sibilities of a product manager. PMs care a lot about schedules, know
how to read a Gantt chart, strive to keep everything on track, and
work to hold everyone to their commitments, but this should only be
a sliver of their time and attention.
A project manager is a specialist whose subject matter knowledge
helps them excel at understanding the fine points, but whose core
expertise is keeping projects on track, on time, and on budget, not on
defining the value of a product and driving the strategy to maximize
that value.
Some project managers do become product managers and when they
do, just as with UX designers, they must master a whole series of
adjacent skills beyond “keeping the trains running on time.”
Product consultant and author Matt LeMay, co-founder of Sudden
Compass, put it this way: “Product managers have both the opportu-
nity and the responsibility to ask ‘why?’”
A Product Manager Is Not a
Product Owner
There are core differences between a product manager and a product
owner. Although companies often use the terms indiscriminately to

What Exactly Does a Product Manager Do? 5
mean the same thing or apply their own meaning, for this book, we’ll
define them this way:
A product manager orchestrates the efforts of a cross-disciplinary
team to ship software experiences as part of accomplishing
strategic business goals.
A product owner is a person who shapes and guides the engineer-
ing team as they develop software. In this model, they are a bit
like a very tactical product manager, but one who is primarily
focused on the tracking tasks. This is an engineer-centric role
invented in the absence of true product managers.
Originally, the product owner tended to be drawn from the com-
pany’s engineering pool, and some teams used a specialized scrum
master role that required training and certification and focused on
the project management dimensions of an Agile scrum development
environment. Product owners from the engineering team were often
a team lead but not always. However, today, there are many different
real-world uses of this title in practice, including teams where the
primary business stakeholder is called the product owner, or in some
government contexts in which the “product owner” is the person
ultimately responsible for what the team delivers, more akin to what
most businesses would call a head of product or what some academic
projects would call a primary investigator.
Product owner activities likewise are often part of the work of
a product manager, to the extent that some businesses even treat
the product owner as an entry- or low-level product manager job title,
but again this somewhat obscures the origin of the role from outside
of the product management tradition.
Where Did Product Managers
Come From?
So where did the tradition of a product manager come from? Why
does everyone now seem to speak in terms of “products” at all in this
digital age, and why are the people called upon to pull it all together
called product managers?
The deep history of product management came from the 20th
century concept of marketing, which emerged as an attempt to really
understand a potential customer and to be more scientific about
measuring the size of the market, the reach of a product, and so on.

6 Chapter 1
(Some of this should sound familiar, as new generations rediscover
these ideas and frame them in terms of research, humans, users,
experience, experimentation, or analysis.)
The product metaphor itself is a bit double-edged in the internet age.
The value it offers is to help focus and concretize the offering you are
building to meet the needs of real people, or do jobs for them, or ease
their journeys, and so on.
But the very real need to be specific and clear about what you are mak-
ing (and what you are not) can easily hide the slippery nature of online
products, which differ from their industrial counterparts in two major
ways that both fall under the heading of “actually being a service”:
• In contrast to physical products in the old “packaged widget in
a box on a shelf” sense, most software made these days is SaaS
(software as a service), hosted in the cloud, accessible via the
web and sometimes with native app clients, and resistant to
some of the finite constraints of the manufacturing process (sunk
costs, waterfall processes, and limited ability to make affordable
changes once the product starts shipping).
• Online products also tend to be services, in the sense of working
for or providing assistance to their users in an ongoing way (vs.
the concrete experience of using an object or tool).
Regardless of the subtext of the word product and the mental frames
that may get dragged along by its use, it has emerged as a way of
talking about the product or service being built to meet the needs
of real people in a valuable way.
A mid-20th century product manager would have usually been some-
one with a business background, if not a degree in business, and the
earliest digital equivalents inherited some of that DNA.
Product Manager as Business Manager
Product management to this day is perceived by most people as
a business discipline or practice. Core to the role of the product
manager is the responsibility for the business case, business strategy,
and financial viability of a product.
Unfortunately, this stereotype can be negative: for example, the
“suit,” the bean-counter, or the boss man who only cares about the

What Exactly Does a Product Manager Do? 7
bottom line. Yes, there are plenty of people with product titles out
there living up to those clichés, but it doesn’t have to be that way.
UX designers interested in product management can start by embrac-
ing the realities, necessities, and even the joy of business. It doesn’t
have to be a dirty word.
When the product manager role first emerged in large software and
other tech companies, it came with that business foundation and was
often paired with technology or balanced by engineering and per-
haps one or more other pillars (such as clinical expertise in a health
enterprise, or editorial content in a media company, etc., depending
on the nature of the business).
The equivalent role that emerged at Microsoft at the time was called
program manager. Today, program management usually refers to a
separate discipline dedicated to operational execution of complex pro-
grams, generally consisting of multiple ongoing interrelated projects.
These PMs nearly always had MBAs and at times rubbed seasoned
engineers and designers the wrong way when “put in charge”
directly out of school.
A number of business titles and roles have contributed to how prod-
uct management is practiced today, and along the way, many people
have done product management work under these titles, roles such
as business analyst, product marketer, customer success specialist,
and others. Execution-related business skills, such as project manage-
ment, decision-making, strategic alignment, and leadership factor in
there somewhere as well.
Sometimes the business aspect of the role is summarized with a say-
ing, “The product manager is the CEO of the product,” but this really
isn’t true. The only value of that expression is that in an extremely
broad way it suggests that the PM has a business responsibility for
their product that is central and critical. The buck stops with the
product manager.
But the expression is frankly more misleading than helpful because
CEOs control the budget, CEOs can hire or fire the team, and just
about everybody reports ultimately to the CEO. Product managers
have business responsibilities, sure, but they do not wield anything
like CEO power.

8 Chapter 1
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
MBA NOT REQUIRED
A couple of years ago, I was part of a team led by Matte Scheinker
that was charged with raising the product bar at AOL, which had
newly spun off from its disappointing Time/Warner merger and
was playing catch-up with a decade-old style of web development.
One of the things we did was review and update the HR ladders
for product managers and UX designers, indicating what level
of accomplishment was required across a series of criteria to be
hired at or promoted to each level—from associate to VP (with an
individual-contributor track leading to principal, at the director
level for designers).
The old grid required the product managers to have an MBA. We
removed this. The HR department asked if we could make it “MBA
preferred,” but we said that this wasn’t the case. If anything, we
were MBA-neutral. An MBA might help make a PM better at the
business side of the role, or it might not. The time spent getting the
MBA yielded one set of experiences and contacts, and the equivalent
time spent working yielded another. By itself, the degree didn’t tell
us much; however, we didn’t penalize anyone for having an MBA!
Joff Redfern, a VP of Product at Atlassian (and formerly LinkedIn
and Facebook) prefers to frame this aspect of the role as thinking like
a general manager. It has some of the same limitations in terms of
direct authority, but more closely matches the notion of one person
with business-related responsibility for a coherent chunk of work.
Clement Kao of Product Manager HQ points out the GMs also have
hiring and firing responsibilities, and he prefers to frame these
operational and strategic leadership aspects as being “both coaches
and janitors.”
Alongside this business-focused type of product manager, the turn
of the millennium saw some managers and lead developers emerge
from engineering departments and take on product management
roles, sometimes, at first, in the absence of a true product practice, but
more generally as a new career path open to engineering managers.
Product Manager as Marketing Manager
Another antecedent of today’s product manager roles lies in the
concept of a marketing manager or even a product marketing

What Exactly Does a Product Manager Do? 9
manager, which is the historic origin of the role in 20th century busi-
ness practices. Interestingly, the obsession with customer needs that
is inherent in product management derives from this fundamental
DNA. The obsessions today with addressing markets and achieving
product-market fit are other elements of continuity with the market-
ing orientation of early product management.
Both roles still exist as distinct positions in many organizations. This
dichotomy can potentially lead to turf or coordination issues when
the product manager wants to approach product/marketing issues
from a product-centric point of view and the product marketing
manager wants to approach these same issues from a marketing-
centric framework.
The article “Product Marketing Manager vs. Product Manager:
Where Do You Draw the Line?” (www.productplan.com/learn/
product-manager-vs-product-marketing-manager/) does a nice job
of delineating these roles and making a case for them being separate,
boiling down the essence to this:
• Product management’s role is strategic oversight.
• Product marketing’s role is message creation.
Product Manager as Engineering Manager
Given that the context of all of this is software and technology, science
and engineering, on some level any product manager in the internet
age is a technical product manager, at least in the eyes of people who
don’t work in tech. (In practice, roles defined as technical product manag-
ers almost always require a computer science or analytical or subject
matter expertise with the specific technical approach of the business.)
Engineers with big-picture skills (such as technical design and
architecture), a vision for the purpose and value of what the team is
building, and the ability to debate pros and cons with other stake-
holders to make the case for a specific direction, may find they have
greater leverage and ability to steer the ship as product managers.
The influx of engineer-trained PMs into the field started rebalancing
the mix of skills expected from product people, with the business
sense still a core orientation and now coupled with a deep mastery
of the technical issues involved in software development.
When the role is literally advertised as a “technical product man-
ager” or at an engineering-led company such as Google or any of

10 Chapter 1
its many imitators, the job application will include several technical
interviews involving puzzles and problem-solving questions very
similar to the ones presented to programmers, without necessarily
requiring them to write any code.
Questions involving sorting, efficiency, algorithmic complexity, etc.
reflect product cultures that are heavily centered on engineering skill
sets, experience, and frames of reference.
Google is famous both for making product managers “earn” engi-
neering resources and buy in. There’s no guarantee that producing
a spec means anyone will build it for you. But Google is also famous
for cultivating and empowering product managers. The Associate
Product Manager program with its structured training and rotation
that Marissa Mayer pioneered there has been widely imitated at
other aspiring tech giants.
But again, the type of product manager favored in shops with Google
or Google-adjacent cultures tends to be highly technical, hence
these brain-teaser type interview sessions that really only make
sense as a filter for programming-capable minds and not so much as
the far-fetched notion that the PM will routinely debate the “big-O
complexity” of several competing algorithmic approaches.
NOTE THE TECHNICAL PM INTERVIEW
I still fondly recall a day I spent on the Google campus being
interviewed and taken to lunch by a sequence of 11 white men of
varying ages and hair colors and degrees of athleticism or geeki-
ness. Many of the interviews were a lot of fun and, to be honest,
I’ve always liked puzzles, although not so much under pressure
with big bucks at stake. They rotate these questions over time so
that you can usually find expired examples with a little searching.
For example, I was asked at one point how an algorithm might
work to efficiently zero in on the correct five-digit passcode on a
keypad, given certain rules or constraints about the numbers (to
do with repetition, etc.). As I said, it was almost fun.
And to be fair, nowadays most decent places that pose challenges
like these encourage them to collaborate with you and help you
along with your thinking. (If a role like that is your goal and you
aren’t a computer scientist, there are books to help you cram. More
about choosing your career path in Chapter 2, “Do You Want to Be a
Product Manager?”)

What Exactly Does a Product Manager Do? 11
At Yahoo, the product organization was a peer to and equally as
powerful as the engineering organization. From the beginning,
Yahoo’s websites were planned and built by people called producers
(adopting terminology from media and broadcasting).
Over several years, these jobs gained in complexity and ultimately
diverged into two distinct roles, one focused on planning and
directing what got built (product managers) and the other doing the
actual building (front-end engineers). It actually took some time for
the front-end developers to be accepted as peers in the engineering
organization, given prejudices at the time against HTML markup
and the other front-end languages, but the significance here is that
the product role, at least at one of the 90s era internet tech companies
(“dot coms”), shared a common ancestor with a programming job.
Fast forward to today, and the role is still a highly technical one. A
strong UX practitioner is going to take a serious interest in the tech-
nology they are designing with and for, just as an artist takes pains
to understand their materials, but at the same time the designer
is empowered to explore possibilities without constantly bringing
to mind the apparent limitations of the existing technical stack
and codebase.
Product managers (and not just “technical” product managers), by
contrast, must delve even more deeply into the substance and proper-
ties and limitations of the technologies being worked with and never
really have the luxury of putting those factors to one side. (PMs also
spend much more time working directly with engineers than most
UX designers do, which creates further pressure to demonstrate a
thorough command of the technical factors that figure into any dif-
ficult decision.)
The new hybrid eng/biz type product model still left a lot to be
desired as practiced, as most companies still follow waterfall and
command-and-control software development lifecycle practices,
but in the first decade or so of the millennium a few influential
practitioners studying what worked well in Silicon Valley started
articulating a fresh model of “lean” and “agile” and “fully
empowered” product management.
Product Manager as Experimental Explorer
Marty Cagan, a consultant with the Silicon Valley Product Group
and author of the book Inspired, made a strong case for empowering

12 Chapter 1
the product team to investigate problem spaces, conduct discovery
processes, meet customers and prospects face-to-face, and seek to
deeply understand what people need and what they will love to
bring valuable products to the market.
Rich Mironov, a product consultant who advises companies, takes
interim product executive roles (he calls this smoke jumping) and
writes and teaches workshops. They and others have sought to raise
the bar and to highlight the most effective techniques, approaches,
and mindsets, while remaining clear-eyed and cautionary about the
institutional patterns and incentives that can push back against these
approaches.
For example, an empowered product team should understand the
goals and outcomes it is seeking and be engaged in a process of iter-
ating experimentally toward meeting those goals. The team should
be capable of communicating to others what the current snapshot of
the plan is, in the form of a roadmap (much more on this to come),
expressed in terms of what is underway right now, what is coming
up next, and what is expected to come later.
Many leaders in traditional organizations balk when they see a
roadmap communicated this way, especially if what they had in
mind when they asked to see the roadmap was really a set of firm
release dates on which clearly defined features would be delivered
and launched.
But committing to deliver a feature on a certain date, based on a fully
baked specification, is a recipe for disaster. That process is too brittle
and fails in the face of new information, data from users, stakehold-
ers, and changing market conditions, just to name a few.
This is the same notion from the “lean” movement, popularized by
Eric Ries’s book The Lean Startup: The product manager in an empow-
ered team is facilitating a constant cycle that involves learning from
what is currently “shipped” and “in the wild,” feeding these insights
back into renewed discovery processes driven by qualitative inquiry
to explore hypotheses and seek understanding, redefinition of the
problem space, identification of further opportunities or experiments
worth exploring, decisions about what to build or fix next, and ship-
ping to start the cycle anew.
This cycle shown in Figure 1.1 can be modeled in great detail but is
most often reduced to “Build, Measure, Learn.”

What Exactly Does a Product Manager Do? 13
FIGURE 1.1
“Build, measure, learn”
is a simple but power-
ful model that lies at
the heart of lean prod-
uct management, with
its bias to action and
emphasis on learning
and experimentation.
It’s worth noting that despite the title and the fact that it’s a cycle, you
generally do not start with building. You start by learning something
or by measuring (initially assessing) something, learning about
something, and then building a thing.
This process of constant learning, feeding back into discovery,
redefinition of problems and opportunities, and iterative design is
applicable in the early stages while prototyping new ideas, as well
as throughout the life of a product. The approach is still gaining
adherents (for example, people like Jeff Gothelf and Josh Seiden have
worked hard to bring lean ideas about experimentation to the UX
community). Outside of innovative tech companies and start-ups,
though, the idea of a product manager as an experimenter (or “mad
scientist”) is not as fully distributed and accepted.
But all product managers work with data and spend hours every
week studying it closely. Whatever the cycle of learning and iteration,
the job cannot be done without accurate signals about what is work-
ing and how the software is actually being used, and this focus on
managing what you can measure carries through all of these strands
mentioned so far—business, engineering, and entrepreneurial
experimentation.
The most recent archetype to contribute their superpowers to the ideal
product manager is one you should be familiar with: the designer.

14 Chapter 1
Product Manager as Creative Artist
The experimental product manager is already more of a creative
type than a simple number cruncher or bean counter. This person
is someone who is intensely exploring possibilities and looking for
ways to discover new solutions to acute problems.
The rise of user experience design in all its various forms, alongside
the business-school friendly notion of “design thinking,” coincided
in the culture with widespread awareness of the creative mythology
of the Apple computer, the heroic figure of Steve Jobs, and for design
aficionados, Jobs’s collaboration with industrial designer Jonathan Ive.
Suddenly, creative founders were getting funding for their own
start-ups. Other start-ups were making their first design hires much
earlier in the process. Design (or “design thinking”) offered proven
methods for harnessing creativity and inventing innovative solutions
to interesting problems.
Product management evolved as well. At first, PMs paid lip service to
UX design, made their own wireframes based on zero research, and
asked designers to, more or less, color them in. But now product prac-
titioners take user experience research and design seriously as core
disciplines with invaluable, necessary skills and techniques. They
also foster mindsets that are required to develop product experiences
that people will love and return to again and again.
The lean movement had already shifted its focus emphatically onto
the customer (or potential customer). Conveniently user experience
research and design revolves around this exact same obsession!
UX has methods and traditions for learning from customers, and
provides systems and models and tools for exploring and communi-
cating solutions.
Design also excels at redefining problems and questioning prior
assumptions, and much like UX design leads, product managers are
charged with inspiring and rallying creativity in others. So alongside
the business heads, coders, and founder types turning into product
managers, some user experience designers, managers, directors, and
VPs now jump to the adjacent product track as their careers evolve.

What Exactly Does a Product Manager Do? 15
Three Other Traits Shared by All Great
Product Managers
Great product managers tend to have the following personality
characteristics:
• Curious
• Connecting
• Courageous
They are curious almost to the extent of feeling like a busybody,
being nosy, wanting to “know all the things,” keeping tabs on
everything, and being incredibly “high context” and thorough
about understanding.
They are connecting in the sense of constantly “connecting the dots”
to form the big picture, orchestrating the performance, keeping
people in the loop, providing the glue or lubrication or the circula-
tory fluid or whatever metaphor you prefer for the combination of
emotional intelligence, “soft skills,” and implicit ties that enable
teams to thrive and work well.
And they are courageous in the sense of being brave enough to take
risks, make mistakes, face problems square on, evaluate failures
coldly, and learn ferociously from every experience, good or bad.
This courageous behavior sets a tone that encourages others to try
harder and seek more difficult goals.
So What Does a PM Do?
OK, so now you know what product managers are responsible for
(value and focus), where product managers came from (from all
over), and what makes a good product manager (business sense,
entrepreneurialism, technical chops, experimentalism, creativ-
ity, inquisitiveness, emotional intelligence, and courage — easy
peasy, right?).
But how does a PM apply that mix of skills and aptitudes to fulfill
these responsibilities? What are the primary activities, processes, and
tasks of a product manager, or in other words, “What exactly does a
PM do all day?”
For a day in the life of a product manager, check out the section “A
Typical Day” in Chapter 2, “Do You Want to Be a Product Manager?”

16 Chapter 1
Key Insights
• Product managers are responsible for value. A sufficiently
valuable product will delight customers and support the
business making the product financially.
• Don’t confuse product management and project management,
but product managers do usually have some project manage-
ment responsibilities.
• A product owner fills a role in Agile scrum development
practices and is not the same as a product manager, but some
product managers do fill this role as well.
• Product management originated as a business discipline,
influenced by product marketing, business analysis,
program management, among other practices studied in
MBA programs.
• In the software development world, many engineering
managers have evolved into product managers.
• In Silicon Valley (writ large), product management has
taken on the entrepreneurial virtues of experimentation and
exploration, and the “build, measure, learn” cycle.
• Today, it is becoming more common for UX design practitioners
and managers to move into product management roles,
bringing the creativity and innovation of design crafts with
them. (You are here.)
• Great product managers are (benign) busybodies who
constantly weave together the motley strands that make
up software and are brave enough to lead teams into the
unknown in search of insights and ever greater value.

CHAPTER 2
Do You Want
to Be a Product
Manager?
Why a Product Manager? 18
So, Are These Good Reasons? 24
But What Exactly Do Ya Do Here? 24
A Typical Day 27
What If You Don’t Want to Be a Product Manager
After All? 29
Key Insights 30

18 Chapter 2
S
o far, the role of a product manager probably sounds pretty
good. It may be a bit broad and overleveraged at times, but it
does play a pivotal role in what actually gets done, potentially
expanding the range of influence beyond all but the most influential
UX leader.
If you’re already practicing UX in the context of a product team, or if
you’re preparing to transition to a product-oriented organizational
model, or being asked to fulfill a quasi-product role in addition to
your UX responsibilities, then you’ve got good reasons for wanting
to understand what makes product managers tick and what product
management is really all about.
Beyond that lies the idea of fully moving from a UX-defined role
to becoming a product manager yourself, full time. Maybe you’ve
started wondering if you want to be a product manager, or even
beginning to think that yes, in fact, you do want to be a product
manager. If that’s part of your reason for picking up this book, then
this is a good opportunity to practice the old “Five why’s” method of
inquiry invented by precocious children, starting with the following
basic question: Why do you want to be a product manager?
Why a Product Manager?
Putting aside the challenges involved in doing the job effectively, there
are a number of reasons why it might have occurred to you that prod-
uct management might represent a viable career growth direction for
you as a UX practitioner. Some of your reasons might be the following:
Professional and career
• Professional interests
• Career progression planning
Ambition
• Realities of the current org structure
• Lust for power (“the dark side”)
Evolving interests
• Waning interest in UX practitioner work
• Fascination with the business side of product

Do You Want to Be a Product Manager? 19
Professional and Career Reasons
UX career paths vary across organizations, for sure, but within the
realm of design and related practices, such as user research and UX
writing, the most common fork in the road is the matter of becoming
a manager of other designers or aspiring to become a principal, lead-
ing by example as an individual contributor.
At least in some organizations, there is the possibility of a third path,
one that might be thought of more like the “becoming a manager”
path, and even less purely about design, which is becoming a prod-
uct manager at some level and then climbing that ladder.
For example, at Yahoo, before it was subsumed into Verizon, the VP
of UED (user experience design) for the search product team, Larry
Cornett, moved “up” into the role of VP of Product for that same
team. Senior director of UED Luke Wroblewski took on a product
role as well. This was the “if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em” approach
(see Figure 2.1).
FIGURE 2.1
At Yahoo, Larry Cornett (left) and Luke Wroblewski (right) made the leap from
user experience to product leadership roles.
So there are times when the organization may steer you in this
direction by offering more, better, or richer opportunities on the
product track than they do on the UX track. (Another option in such
a situation is to fight for better career and professional opportunities
for UX practitioners, but it’s always worthwhile to assess the realities
of a given situation as you assess how best to maneuver through it.)

20 Chapter 2
Take the time to examine these pressures, which are fundamentally
external. Be aware of them, but look also to your own internal and
intrinsic motivations to make sure that your chosen path aligns with
all of them as much as possible.
Ambition
Another driver for some is surely the opportunity to have the final say
on some important things. Despite the stereotype of UXers answering
every question with “it depends,” it can actually be frustrating for
many of them to push hard for a strong point of view, stand up for
users, make the case for research and design iteration, and still get
overruled by someone in a different role who may or may not seem to
fully understand the importance of user-centered design.
The urge to become the decider, at least on some things, and the
desire to be in the room when important things are being discussed
and weighed, can also steer one’s thoughts toward product manage-
ment. This temptation may strike one’s UX colleagues as a flirtation
with “the dark side,” or even a selling out of UX ideals in the service
of lust for power (if only).
There is nothing wrong with ambition. Wanting to have a say in
things is also reasonable. At the same time, be careful what you wish
for. There are two possible unintended consequences of getting more
powerful in your org by wearing a product hat:
• You may end up perpetuating an inferior approach to product
management that dominates UX but does not use its value wisely.
• You may end up losing what makes work meaningful for you.
Neither of those things will necessarily happen, but if ambition is your
sole reason for looking into product roles, the risk is a lot higher.
One side effect that you are guaranteed to experience is the burden
of all this decision-making. Like the proverbial dog who caught the
car, you’ll inevitably at some point feel overwhelmed by the weight
of critical decisions landing in your inbox. It comes with the territory.
Mind you, some people thrive on it!

Do You Want to Be a Product Manager? 21
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
44 SIGNS YOU ARE BECOMING A “REAL”
PRODUCT MANAGER
In his essay “44 Signs You Are Becoming a Product Manager,”
John Cutler (head of product research and education at Amplitude)
gives a preview of the slings and arrows that go along with the
decision-making responsibility of a product manager. He starts
by asking “How do you know you’re on your way to earning your
PM/PO wings? What signals progress? Your first release? Getting
‘certified’? Putting together a pretty roadmap?” before saying “No,
it’s these 44 signs” (reprinted with permission):
1. You’ll feel like you are annoying the crap out of your team.
2. You’ll find yourself sheepishly asking for an estimate.
3. You’ll realize that estimates are worthless, but still be pres-
sured for a “rough sense of timeframe.”
4. You’ll struggle to explain why your intuition is valid (and
be right).
5. You’ll struggle to explain why your intuition is valid (and
be wrong).
6. You’ll be pressured to ship something before it’s ready.
7. You’ll try to make something perfect when you should have
shipped it months ago.
8. You’ll face the harsh reality of a usability test.
9. You’ll put together the best roadmap in the world, get every-
one to buy in, and then everything will change in an instant.
10. You’ll forget a seemingly trivial detail that will cause a mas-
sive delay.
11. You’ll rabbit hole on a seemingly important detail that will
cause a massive delay for no apparent customer value.
12. You’ll be blamed for being too solution focused.
13. You’ll be blamed for being too high level.
14. You’ll find out that a new competitor is killing it.
15. You’ll have to break crappy news to your team (often admit-
ting that you’re to blame).
16. You’ll be jealous about and how they do
product (and be reminded of that fact because they incessantly
blog about it).
continues

22 Chapter 2
FROM THE TRENCHES . . . (continued)
17. You’ll fancy yourself as technical but be humbled daily.
18. You’ll fancy yourself as UX-savvy but be humbled daily.
19. You’ll fancy yourself as business-savvy but be humbled daily.
20. You’ll say “my team,” but feel oddly distant from your team.
21. You’ll be worried about “distracting” your team and find yourself
not being transparent. And this will come back to haunt you.
22. You’ll find yourself parroting something engineers told you and
realize just how little you understand.
23. You’ll be asked to make your backlog/roadmap more visible, but
then be derided when you shift things around.
24. You’ll have a day filled with meetings and realize that you added
absolutely no value.
25. You’ll run a great meeting, and no one will notice.
26. You’ll work up a full-fledged wireframe and then try to tell your
UX team member that you don’t have a design in mind.
27. You’ll ship a dud feature that no one uses.
28. You’ll ship an awesome feature that no one even notices.
29. You’ll have to implement an exec’s idea and know it sucks. And
then have to live through the success theater that accompanies the
release of said idea.
30. You’ll try to follow up on the impact of shipped features, but get
overwhelmed by the next batch.
31. You’ll want to pull your hair out listening to your team debate the
technical merits of two, almost identical approaches.
Evolving Interests
As you’ll see in Chapter 3, “UX Skills That Carry Over,” product work
and UX work do exist on a spectrum with some overlap and some
gray areas, which tend to be at the strategic, system-level, big-picture,
research and data-informed concept model end of the spectrum.
For folks who already prefer that mix of tasks and specialties over
the more production-oriented design craft end of the UX spectrum,
transferring into product management can represent a way to
continue moving in this direction, toward orchestration.

Do You Want to Be a Product Manager? 23
32. You’ll advocate for your pet solution against an almost identical
team proposed approach.
33. You’ll tell a customer “it’s on the roadmap” and hear them laugh
out loud.
34. You’ll say “No” to something just to prove to yourself that you
have some influence and a point of view, and then realize that
doing that is stupid.
35. You’ll say “Yes” to a customer in a moment of pure delusion and
then find yourself stubbornly trying to defend a feature that only
they will use.
36. You’ll hear that you are not technical enough for the role.
37. You’ll hear that you are too technical for the role and lack the
soft skills.
38. You’ll go to a conference and learn about lean startup method-
ology, and then come back to work and realize that the word
hypothesis scares the shit out of people.
39. You’ll be the single wringable neck.
40. You’ll find yourself running cover for your team.
41. You’ll find yourself cursing your team under your breath.
42. You’ll be empowered on paper, but find yourself taking orders.
43. You’ll catch yourself giving orders and learn to empower your
team instead.
44. You’ll think you’ve learned from your mistakes, and you’ll
magically make them again (just to make sure the learning
is ingrained).
It’s also possible to become more interested in other aspects of
making software that don’t bear on design as directly, even if they
may still keep an intense customer focus. The business aspects of a
product manager role rarely impinge on the creative world of user
experience research, strategy, and design.
For sure, some UX leads end up getting deeply knowledgeable and
wise about the business aspects of the experiences they are respon-
sible for. This can, in turn, lead to well-informed choices down the
road about whether to shift to a more business-oriented role, such

24 Chapter 2
as a product manager, or to stay in the UX lane and hang onto that
knowledge as yet another superpower in your kit.
Others among us are moving through a series of roles. There are
engineers who become UX designers and then see in product man-
agement a way to combine those aptitudes in a single role.
In many ways, these are the best reasons for exploring a change of
role, driven as they are by your internal and intrinsic needs and
interests. At the same time, they do not alone guarantee a successful
satisfying transition if the organizational support is absent.
So, Are These Good Reasons?
All these reasons are legitimate, and they all come with their own
caveats and consequences. You don’t need a good reason to explore
a potential opportunity for growth. But do take some time to think
about the trade-offs and opportunity costs involved in pursuing a
product management career or in sticking with user experience.
Look especially closely at whether you are falling for a “grass is
greener” fallacy that romanticizes the advantage of the alternative
or the road not taken and minimizes the mowing, weeding, and
manure spreading that produced your neighbor’s green lawn.
In particular, UX practitioners considering the fork in the career path
known as product management need to understand the day-to-day
realities of doing the job.
But What Exactly Do Ya Do Here?
As UX folks start to rub elbows with product people, they become
acutely aware of—and possibly even worried about—the gray areas
where responsibilities overlap. And, for sure, the two roles do share
many values (user-focus, research, iteration, testing/measuring, etc.).
These shared concerns can somewhat obscure the ways in which the
roles differ, so you should know that the jobs are quite different indeed.
Anybody considering product management as a career should ask
themselves three questions, first:
• Do I love spreadsheets?
• Am I a good writer?
• Am I deeply curious about interpersonal dynamics?

Do You Want to Be a Product Manager? 25
Product management is not a design job. It does require some famil-
iarity with design and a deep sensitivity to user experience concerns,
but the day-to-day tasks and craft work of product management
rarely involve pushing pixels.
There is a bit of diagram-making for sure, and there are a lot of PMs
out there making wireframes and even prototypes, but even those
folks spend the vast majority of their time working with words and
data, not pictures.
So if you love spending your days in Figma or Sketch or Swift, then
you might not enjoy giving most or all of that up for the product
role and responsibility. Instead of living inside creative art-making
software packages, you’re likely to spend the bulk of your time using
Agile scrum project management tools such as Jira (with Confluence
usually), doing things like:
• Writing specification docs
• Decomposing epics into user stories
• Grooming the backlog
• Planning upcoming sprints
• Answering developer questions on tickets
• Reviewing demos and either accepting them or asking
for revisions
• Reviewing automatic test data
• Looking at burn-down charts and other visualizations
of progress
• Conducting retrospectives
Where else will you spend your time? In email (or Slack, but defi-
nitely writing and replying to a lot of messages) and in your calendar
software, scheduling meetings that don’t interrupt makers from their
most productive times of day, facilitating Agile rituals typically on
biweekly cadence (planning, daily stand-ups, demos, retrospectives),
and reporting to the larger company, leadership, or board, on road-
map updates quarterly, if not monthly.
And that’s just the writing part.
You really do have to like numbers, math, analysis, spreadsheets, and
databases to be a great product manager. It’s a very metric-informed,
evidence-based practice. Some of the most valuable signals you get
about what to ship next and how the things you’ve already shipped

26 Chapter 2
are faring come in the form of massive waves of data that yield up
their insights only through manipulation, reframing, study, and deep
familiarity.
For UX designers, the material you work with is the substance of
the experience: the words (copy), the visual metaphors, the interac-
tions, and the broader experience. Just as a potter develops a subtle
and sophisticated feel for the texture, granularity, and performative
properties of their clay, a UX practitioner develops a similar feel for
the digital software materials with which they craft affordances.
For product managers, in a very real sense, the material you work
with is this welter of data (alongside qualitative signals, of course),
which has its own texture, granularity, and informative properties. It
requires deep immersion for sustained periods to develop the neces-
sary feel for your own product’s data.
A product manager develops very sensitive antennae (or if you’re a
pop culture enthusiast, call it a spidey sense) that react fast when the
morning report on key North Star metrics heralds an unexpected
dip in daily active users or a spike in sales. (And that’s before even
getting into machine learning [ML] and other flavors of artificial
intelligence [AI].)
If you love charts, graphs, visualizing multidimensional data,
numerical analysis, sleuthing, and “living in your data,” then you’re
going to love product management.
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
NOT ALL PMS ARE QUANTITATIVE NERDS
Clement Kao, Principal PM at Blend and cofounder at Product Man-
ager HQ (PMHQ) points out “As an exception, truly amazing B2B
PMs can get away without numbers, since they’re so deeply locked
in with each individual customer’s priorities, needs, and mindsets.
That said, there’s definitely no escaping numbers in B2C!”
And Matt LeMay of Sudden Compass raises a good nuanced point:
“This is sometimes but not always true. I don’t like any of those
things (‘numbers, math, analysis, spreadsheet, or databases’), but I
have the three qualities you described earlier.”

Do You Want to Be a Product Manager? 27
A Typical Day
So, obviously, you know what your days are like now doing UX.
Depending on your role, you may spend time conducting and
analyzing user interviews and other forms of research and dis-
covery, sketching, exploring, and iterating on design solutions at a
high or detailed level, critiquing and reviewing the design work of
colleagues, developing and testing prototypes, crafting production
ready interfaces, and so on.
You may spend entire days with minimal human communication
and maximum time with a drawing package filling your large screen,
lost in the creative flow of finding ever more satisfying solutions to
challenging problems.
Not all days are the same, but there are recognizable patterns.
Similarly, as a product manager, your workdays will change depend-
ing on where you are in the rhythmic development cadence, on the
role you play on the team, and on the approach to product manage-
ment pursued by your organization.
But there are recognizable patterns.
So, for example, across multiple product management roles, here is a
generic typical day that would fit many real days across your career.
At home/before the official workday starts:
4:30 a.m. — Wake up in the middle of the night and remember some-
thing important that nobody else is tracking. Either jot it down on the
night table or get out of bed, move to the home office, and update a
Jira ticket or reply to a message before getting some water and going
back to sleep. (Maybe answer a few other overnight messages from
remote teams first, while you’re up.)
6:30 a.m. — Get out of bed, look at Slack on phone, reply to some mes-
sages. Do morning routine: coffee, shower, dress, coffee, breakfast,
email, Slack, Jira, coffee.
7:30 a.m. — Review daily update of North Star metric data. If anything
seems interesting, dig into the source data and try not to lose track
of time. If anything turns up that is threatening or promising and
immediately actionable, notify other people of the issue and start a
process of figuring out how to address it in time.

28 Chapter 2
At work/real workday:
9:00 a.m. — Facilitate daily stand-up with team (developers,
sometimes the UX folks but they don’t always show up, other con-
tributors), in this case functioning as a de facto PO (product owner):
• You bring the donuts. (Literally, sometimes, and figuratively in the
sense product expert Ken Norton has popularized, all the time.)
• Review quickly with each person what was accomplished yester-
day (compared with what had been expected), what they expect
to work on today, and whether anything is currently blocking
their progress.
• Keep the meeting moving, addressing anything that can be clari-
fied right away (“Ankit, can you get Allie the credentials she needs
for github?”) and tabling other items to follow up on afterward.
9:30 to about 2:30—A patchwork of the following:
• Meetings with other managers (that is, people for whom meet-
ings are productive), often leads of adjacent teams (such as Eng,
UX, Sales, and Operations), your own manager, and managers
who report to you, if any.
• Communication with customers, potential customers, and other
stakeholders.
• Spec writing, roadmap review, backlog grooming, message
responding.
• Data analysis, perhaps involving customer feedback, poring over
product analytics dashboards, sales forecasts, hardcore profit-
and-loss Excel spreadsheets, or periodic reevaluation of progress
against OKRs (Objectives and Key Results) or other key perfor-
mance indicator metrics.
• Lunch eaten at your desk.
2:30 to about 5:30
• Meeting with makers toward the end of their days—these can
be regular 1–1s with people who report to you (if any), working
meetings with team members to explore and solve problems, or
task-based check-ins to track progress, provide guidance, and
give support.
• Spec writing, roadmap review, backlog grooming, responding to
messages, data analysis.

Do You Want to Be a Product Manager? 29
At home again/after workday:
6:30 to ?? — Finally have time to do the following:
• Read long-form industry articles, product craft essays, and
reports from colleagues that you can’t get to during the workday.
• Work on long-form writing, analysis, and modeling projects
without interruptions.
• Try to be present at home with your family and loved ones.
• Check data one more time before going to sleep.
But that’s just me, so for the rest of the book, you’ll hear from other
product managers sharing a typical day in their lives, to give you a
broader perspective on the various flavors of product management
and environments in which it’s practiced.
What If You Don’t Want to Be a
Product Manager After All?
Whether you came into this merely curious or were on the fence but
now you are positive that UX is the life for you and the siren song of
product management no longer sounds so sweet, it will still behoove
you, as a UX practitioner, to understand product management as well
as you possibly can, among the many respected adjacent disciplines
you work with. You might even feel relieved that somebody wants to
do that part of the work that you appreciate without feeling a desire
to do it yourself.
If you’re still unsure, the rest of the book should help provide you with
information you need to better inform you on that career decision.
And regardless of where you feel you are headed in the long term,
you can still derive benefits from absorbing the product frame of
mind, one in which you view yourself not just as a UX or user-
centered designer but also as a product designer (or researcher,
strategist) working alongside PMs and product engineers.
Likewise, if you’re one of the many UX folks being pressed into
fulfilling some of the nondesign aspects of product work without
having (or wanting) a PM title, working either in the absence of PMs,
filling in as best you can, or in an organization that distributes more
product work to UX people, these insights can prove helpful to you.

30 Chapter 2
So even if you merely seek to understand the product point of view
and work more productively with product managers, read on to
foster that deeper understanding and better collaboration.
Key Insights
• There are many legitimate reasons for considering a move
from UX to product, some of which derive more from exter-
nal pressures and others that come from internal or intrinsic
wants. All come with caveats, and it’s worth spending some
time to examine your own reasons and look at the pros and
cons associated with these factors with clear eyes.
• The most common reasons for switching to product manage-
ment are a desire for professional and career advancement
and a shift in interests (“what gives you joy”) in work.
• Product managers spend a lot more time writing and working
with numbers than they do drawing screens and diagrams.
• Success as a product manager depends in part on a willing-
ness and ability to become deeply intimate with data. It’s
hard to do this if that doesn’t sound interesting (or even
“fun”) to you.
• A product manager’s typical day looks a lot different from
that of a user experience practitioner.

CHAPTER 3
UX Skills That
Carry Over
How PM Differs from UX 32
UX vs. Product Skills Histogram 37
Information Architecture 43
Intense Customer Satisfaction 45
Solving Problems Through Iterative Design 47
Leading Through Influence 48
Product Managers Are from Mars . . . 49
Key Insights 50

32 Chapter 3
T
here will always be some overlap between the duties of
product managers and UX professionals, but this overlap can
function as a healthy tension if addressed forthrightly, or a
wasteful turf battle if not.
Many UX designers look at this overlap and wonder how different
the two roles really are or need be. For those people who are consid-
ering moving into a new role, this raises three important questions:
• Which of my existing skills have equipped me to be a product
manager (and will continue to be helpful to me in that new role)?
• Which of my existing skills and expertise will be less relevant or
entirely unneeded in a product role?
• What are the new skills and practices I will need to master to
complement my foundation in UX?
So, what are the qualities of a UX professional that stand you in good
stead as a product leader? It helps first to clarify the boundaries and
distinctions between UX and product roles and responsibilities.
You’ll also need to dig a bit into the details and get specific about
tasks and skills that might be in the domain of a product manager,
product designer, or UX practitioner. Something called a skills histo-
gram could give you a structured way to investigate these questions
in your own context and landscape.
Then, with concepts clarified and the landscape mapped, you can
take note of the specific areas of user experience mastery that most
directly apply to a product management career.
How PM Differs from UX
The similarities between product and UX design can be deceptive;
however, the roles, rituals, and practices of the two disciplines are
different in many critical ways.
The biggest and most obvious difference between being a UX practi-
tioner and being a product management professional is in the realm
of making decisions.

UX Skills That Carry Over 33
The Decider
Of course, every role requires decisions and has areas of responsibil-
ity where “the buck stops here,” and no practice has a monopoly on
decisiveness, but in a very real way product management is a role
that consists almost entirely of making decisions.
Big decisions (should we build a new feature or fix an existing one?),
medium-sized decisions (can we ship what we just built or does
it still need more work?), small decisions (is this particular bug a
blocker for our next release?), and tiny decisions (does this user story
belong above that one in the backlog?) all fall within the realm of the
product manager. It’s an unending cascade of decisions—decisions
all day long from waking to bedtime.
If you’re a UX designer who feels like you are sometimes left out when
the final decisions are made and your interest in product management
has to do solely with wanting to be the one to make more of the deci-
sions, well your gut instinct is not wrong. But a note of caution: Be careful
what you wish for. Product managers don’t get to say “it depends.”
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
WHO’S THE DECIDER?
UX leader Peter Boersma, who has experience in product manage-
ment as well, points out that PMs do not make all final decisions.
Designers have final say over critical UX choices. Engineers should
be responsible for technical architecture decisions, framework
choices, and so on. PMs don’t have a monopoly on decision-making
at all, but at the same time, they make more decisions per hour
than any of those other roles.
Still, it’s true that on a mature, empowered team, a product manager
facilitates decision-making and ensures that decisions get made
through consultation and collaboration across adjacent disciplines.
Matt LeMay makes a similar point: “Good product managers are
making decisions collaboratively — I’ve actually seen a number
of people transition to PM roles because they want to be “the
decider,” only to immediately lose the trust of their team by mak-
ing decisions in a siloed and anti-collaborative way. If anything, I
would hope that people coming from the UX side would be sensi-
tive to what it feels like to be excluded from a decision — and would
be inclined to be more thoughtful partners in decision-making.”

34 Chapter 3
One of the hardest things about taking on the mantle of decision-
making is recognizing that it’s impossible for all your decisions to be
correct. You have to make peace with the fact that you will get some
things wrong. Inevitably, you will make decisions that don’t pan out,
or decisions that make it clear another choice would have been better.
As Clement Kao, co-founder of Product Manager HQ, said, “When
you don’t make a decision, you’ve actually ‘made the decision to
delay.’ Many entry-level PMs assume ‘If I haven’t decided yet, then it
doesn’t count against me,’ but putting off a decision is itself a hidden
decision with its own consequences.”
For some reason, there is a consensus among PMs that even if you’re
doing well, you’re going to make the wrong decision 25–35% of
the time. You just have to hope you don’t make a company-killing
mistake along the way. One good reason why you need to get
comfortable with this task was stated by LinkedIn founder, Reid
Hoffman, when he said that if you’re not a little embarrassed by the
product you release, then you waited too long to ship it.
That is, you won’t have the luxury to chase down every data point
and every conceivable bit of research up to the point of diminishing
returns for each decision, not when you’re making literally scores of
decisions a day.
If anything, modern Agile development processes anticipate this
issue with their emphasis on “rough consensus and running code.”
One Abstraction Layer from Design
Another big difference between product managers and designers is
that product managers are not designers!
Good product managers care about design, and the role does involve
providing requirements and other materials to help inform design,
sometimes guiding designers, and always facilitating the building
and implementation of designs. But the last thing a designer wants is
a product manager who helpfully does the wireframes or has a few
cast-iron ideas about how to design it.
A great product manager will be an advocate for user experience
practices and will value and champion design, while being careful
not to tread on the domain and prerogatives of the design team.

UX Skills That Carry Over 35
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
PRAGMATISM AND SYNTHESIS VS. IDEALISM AND PURITY
When I was senior director of product management at CloudOn, a start-up
we subsequently sold to Dropbox, we counted it as a great victory that
even our engineering leadership framed many of their arguments about
what technical, process, or product decision they favored in terms of what
would be best for the user experience.
We knew this verbiage might go no deeper than lip service and might
lean heavily on personal opinion about what makes a great experience vs.
rigorous user research and testing based insights and so on, but it was still
a beachhead in the ongoing dialogue about how best to make software.
At the time, I was running the UX practice as well. It was not just that UX
reported to me (as it often does roll up to product leadership in many tech
organizations), but at the time I did not have a leader for the team to give
me leverage and argue with me about the best way forward.
I was trying to wear both hats, as UX lead and as a product director. I
tried to stake out distinct points of view and weigh them against each
other, as best I could. But the truth is that — much like playing a card game
against yourself — the ability to see both sides collapses the debate, and I
always knew what I really thought and wanted to do. I actually craved a
strong UX leader to spar with and find the best results.
At one point, in a meeting when once again someone made a case for
doing or not doing something or fixing or not fixing something by
appealing to the user experience, I caught myself replying “f*** the user
experience” — meaning, in short, that we couldn’t afford to keep fiddling
with the dang thing, and we needed to ship it despite this compromise.
But I did shock myself when I heard myself say that.
The truth is that UX is a role for idealists, purists, seekers, and revolution-
aries. Compromise is hard for such folks.
Product managers do not have the luxury of purity or single-minded ideal-
ism. They do have ideals. They have values. They have North Star goals,
and they have many masters. A big part of product is navigating the path of
balance between competing priorities, without losing sight of the mission.
Taking this thought a step further, Matt LeMay emphasizes that “the
idea that you need to give up the purity of a single perspective and be
able to synthesize and compromise is so important, and it isn’t discussed
enough,” and I really think he’s right.

36 Chapter 3
Now it’s true that product managers still make diagrams, solve
problems, and so on, but if your passion is pushing pixels and your
happy place is in Sketch or Figma, then be aware that most product
managers spend very little to no time using design software.
If you’re the kind of designer who has never feared design manage-
ment and derives creative satisfaction from deploying a team of
talented individuals and bringing out their best work collectively
to make something amazing, then taking your hands off the pixel-
pushing controls may not feel like deprivation.
UX SUPERPOWER ALERT
SYNTHESIS
Probably the greatest comeuppance I’ve experienced since
becoming a real product authority is that the end result is always
something different than what I personally might have shipped
had all the decisions been left up to me. No good idea comes
out at the other end of the process unchanged, and fortunately I
have come to view that as an additive, holistic process where the
end result frequently transcends anything I might have imagined
on my own. Most practitioners grounded in UX have already
mastered synthesizing holistic solutions that address multiple
converging forces, needs, and cross-pressures.
Lean into it! This posture will inevitably clash with any one very
strong point of view or area of expertise. The sales team, cus-
tomer support, the CEO, the data reports, the app store reviews,
and the roadmap may all be shouting about entirely distinct
“Very Important Things” at the same time. As a PM, you have to
pick and choose, and you have to sometimes disappoint.
The Day-to-Day Tasks Are Different
Designers spend their days researching, sketching, ideating, critiqu-
ing, prototyping, testing, and so on. Design managers do art direction
and other design strategy and leadership functions, such as managing
the career and professional development of designers and so on.
In contrast, product managers write emails. They send Slack mes-
sages. They write spec docs. They write proposals. They write release
notes. They groom backlogs. They update roadmaps and present
on how the last quarter results went to stakeholders. They talk to cus-
tomers. They query databases. They consume data reports like water.
They lie awake at night worrying about every single thing.

UX Skills That Carry Over 37
UX vs. Product Skills Histogram
User experience and product management are both “magpie”
disciplines. They both draw from multiple sources, are syncretic, and
cover a different subset of skills and aptitudes from team to team,
and from individual to individual. It can be useful to make a “skills
histogram” to assess yourself, direct reports, potential hires, and
teams as a whole.
The easiest way to understand a skills histogram is to make one for
yourself. First, make a list of the UX skills you are familiar with, and
arrange them roughly from the tactical (design craft and practitioner
execution) end to the strategic (discovery, systems thinking, and
design research) end of the spectrum.
There is no right or wrong list or order. Here is the tactical list I’ve
compiled, which you can also see in Figure 3.1. Your list will vary
from the list presented, but it should look similar.
• Branding
• UI system creation
• Front-end development
• Sound and motion
• Visual design
• Conversational design
• Prototyping
• Studio critique and iteration
• Interaction design
• Wireframing
• UX writing
FIGURE 3.1
Don’t worry too
much about anyone
else’s opinions about
terminology or jargon.
Use terms that make
sense to you and
your coworkers.
After you have your list of craft skills, continue “upstream” or “big-
ger picture” in the process and finish with a list of UX skills listed
here and similar to Figure 3.2.

38 Chapter 3
FIGURE 3. 2
One person’s single
item is another per-
son’s list of three or
four, so again no right
or wrong answers.
The first or top half of the list are UX skills that are not part of
product management. The latter half are UX skills that many product
managers are at times responsible for.
• Content strategy
• Service design
• Collaborative design
• Sketching
• Information architecture
• UX strategy
• Personas and user journeys
• User research
• Research synthesis
• Stakeholder facilitation
• Concept modeling
• Usability testing
UX Histogram
Now, assess yourself for each of the skills or areas of expertise. It’s
OK to eyeball it, but to help with calibrating, use a 9 point scale with
these touchpoints:
1 — novice
3 — beginner
5 — competent
7 — proficient
9 — expert
Rate yourself, and be honest! There’s no value in fooling yourself.
Remember that you don’t need to be an expert in every part of the
job to be a good UX practitioner, but if you know where you aren’t as

UX Skills That Carry Over 39
strong, you can seek out collaborators with complementary skills, or
use this insight to inform your professional development goals.
Figure 3.3 shows an example of my UX histogram.
FIGURE 3.3
This UX histogram is skewed toward strategic, consultative, and
management activities. What does yours look like? Do you recognize
yourself in the mirror?
Product Skills
Now let’s talk about the skills that are part of product management,
but rarely the responsibility of a UX practitioner.
You can see a working list below and in Figure 3.4.
• Customer interaction
• Market research
• Data analysis
• Sprint planning
• Backlog maintenance
• Bug tracking

40 Chapter 3
• North Star metrics
• Acceptance criteria
• User stories and epics
• Roadmapping
• MVP definition
• Feature prioritization
• Revenue modeling
• Hypotheses and
experimentation
• Risk management
• Architecture strategy
• Product-market fit
FIGURE 3.4
As with earlier ele-
ments of this list, these
items are just one
possible set of product
skills that might be
relevant to your team
or context. Your list
may vary.
Now score yourself on these newest items. You can leave lines blank
if you haven’t encountered them, but give yourself at least a point if
you’ve worked with product managers doing these things, or on teams
that talked about these matters.
Full disclosure, here is my “full stack” Product/UX histogram
(Figure 3.5).
When I look at the skill sets that go into product and user experi-
ence practices that I feel I am strongest at today, it makes sense in
retrospect at least why I gravitate first toward the strategic/planning
end of the UX spectrum and also why I ended up going deeply
into product.

UX Skills That Carry Over 41
FIGURE 3.5
Here’s my self-assessment. Others may disagree!

42 Chapter 3
Product and UX Histogram
So a product histogram would be the skills from the latter two
categories in the list, but dropping off most of the design craft
(see Figure 3.6).
FIGURE 3.6
So this is my product histogram.

UX Skills That Carry Over 43
NOTE WHY THE FULL HISTOGRAM?
You may wonder why you bothered to rate yourself in UX skills
that don’t apply much to product management. It’s necessary
in order to have the fullest context possible and be able to view
these various subsections of the spectrum as related to each other.
If you are a UX or product practitioner, your own histogram can help
you explore areas to strengthen, find existing strengths to lean into,
select mentors, and recognize the kinds of team you’ll grow on.
As a team lead, you can make histograms for each team member and
essentially overlay them to see where the team as a whole is strong
or weak, needs mentoring, coaching, or augmentation, and even pos-
sibly where you are overindexed on some particular skills that are in
everybody’s comfort zone.
We’ll dig into new product management skills for the bulk of this
book, but in the rest of this chapter let’s look at which of your UX
skills and experiences are going to be most useful on a product team.
Spoiler alert: I already mentioned that the part of the histogram list
that overlaps product and UX is your preexisting sweet spot, but let’s
dig into the big four as I see it:
• Information architecture
• Intense customer fascination
• Solving problems through iterative design
• Leading through influence
Information Architecture
If there’s one core user experience aptitude that applies most directly
to product management, it’s that oldest of “old skool” practices,
information architecture (or IA for short). For some people, IA still
just means figuring out sitemaps and the names of navigation menus,
but that has always been just the tip of the iceberg.
The critical contribution of information architecture to software
design is the mapping of a “meaning layer” that is abstracted from
the specifics of the pixels, the bits, the lines of code, the data records,
etc. Information architecture provides a toolkit that a product man-
ager can use to forge consensus about the following questions:
• What exactly is it that everyone is getting together to build?
• What is it for?

44 Chapter 3
• Who is it for?
• What does it do—how and why?
• What problem does it solve?
• Where does it fit into the customer’s daily journey and how does
it provide a better fit for the jobs to be done than the existing
ways of doing these things?
• How is it all organized and structured?
• Where is the internal complexity and how is it presented in a
more digestible way to various stakeholders who need to interact
with the product?
Concept models, architecture, diagrams, user journey, swim lanes,
flow diagrams, and even the humble old site maps can function as
the sort of edge artifact that multiple disciplines can rally around
and use as a blueprint or map of where you are today and where
you’re headed.
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
YOU ARE HERE
Maps make great posters. When you help your team visualize
what you’re making or how it’s supposed to work, you can print it
out huge and hang it up on a wall where everyone can see it and
talk about it. This is a gift to everyone else of something that you
needed anyway.
When I was at the Yahoo Developer Network, we published all of
our services in the form of a subway map and gave it out to every-
one on our platform. Another time, we brainstormed a concept
model for our new open strategy, printed it on a plotter, and hung
it in a heavily trafficked hallway near us.
We also attached a magic marker on a string, scribbled on it a bit,
and tore the corners some so people would understand that it was a
conversation and not a declaration. Once a week or so, we’d con-
solidate all the latest comments, reroute arrows, stickies, cross-outs,
and additions, update the concept model, reflow it, and print it out
again for further comment. This practice became almost a game
that anyone on the team could play, and since I sat on the other side
of the cubicle wall, I got to hear some fascinating debates about the
purpose, meaning, and opportunity of our new platform strategy.

UX Skills That Carry Over 45
The ability to block out information relationships and explore logic and
flows in a formalized document that other people can respond to comes
in handy in product communication, alignment, and coordination.
IA is a superpower that will aid your own thinking and your ability
to rally and persuade your colleagues.
Intense Customer Satisfaction
A concept popularized by the lean start-up movement is “to get
outside the building.” It demonstrates that you should actively find
out what your customers and potential customers want or need or find
frustrating, rather than waiting passively for that information. You can
learn a lot from product analytics, market research, sentiment analysis,
and even customer feedback and customer support reports, but there’s
no substitute for getting out of your comfort zone and meeting your
customers and other stakeholders in their work environments.
On an individual level, product managers are encouraged to commit
to contacting a customer outside of work at least once a week, but like
so many of these customer-centric practices, they really only work
when the organization is committed to ongoing user research and
product discovery in general.
Your background in UX should give you a keen understanding of
the fundamental role that research plays in user-centered design.
Furthermore, if you move into a product manager role, you are going
to find a natural ally in the UX researchers in your organization (or,
in some cases, you will need to fight to hire user researchers).
There is a risk that product managers will pursue their own rogue
research and outreach missions without coordinating with user
researchers or other marketing research teams. If this happens,
there can be a lot of wasted and duplicated effort, sometimes justi-
fied because the questions being asked or the research goals are
oriented differently.
However, it’s more than worth it to find common ground with anyone
else who is talking to real people who use or might use your product.
At the very least, ask to piggyback on each other’s forays into research,
but ideally, work together to develop a shared agenda and make the
most of interviews and other research modalities, as a team.

46 Chapter 3
UX SUPERPOWER ALERT
SHARING THE RESEARCH RESPONSIBILITY
This alert comes with a caveat. Your time involved with UX
research clearly provides you with superpowers when it comes
to techniques for understanding customers. At the same time,
sharing the responsibility for product discovery with people who
may follow different conventions can be challenging if you aren’t
willing to make space for approaches that may not seem ideal to
you. Maybe you won’t be leading the research. Figure out how to
make the research as successful as possible, regardless.
Alëna Iouguina wrote a wonderful guide as to how product manag-
ers and UX researchers could pair with each other productively,
based on her experiences at Shopify.
1 
She made the point that the
product manager must ultimately act on the insights derived from
the research (in a way that the researcher does not) and that the
ability to collaborate on shaping the inquiry is the best way to drive
research in a productive direction.
Her diagram from this article shows a well-thought-out cycle of
ongoing research, learning, launches, and further research, ad
infinitum (Figure 3.7).
FIGURE 3.7
Alëna Iouguina shared this cycle that shows where the optimal
spaces for collaboration occur in the research/launch cycle.
1 Check out this article: https://ux.shopify.com/good-things-happen-when-a-
product-manager-pairs-with-a-ux-researcher-a88923c94ce8

UX Skills That Carry Over 47
Solving Problems Through
Iterative Design
Now for some of you, this third UX aptitude that applies well to
product management may be a bit of a reach. Product manage-
ment’s take on iteration draws a lot more heavily on data-informed
experiments than the design-studio model adopted by interactions
designers. UX has not made its peace with data in every organiza-
tion. (Some organizations do not gather data robustly or analyze it
rigorously at all, while others silo the data away from the design and
creative processes, and still others use data oppressively to dictate
design decisions in a manner that leaves UX designers with bad
associations for the concept of data in general).
One phrase you may hear thrown about is “data-driven design.”
Data is not a good driver. (Data, please don’t take the wheel. Your
dashboard doesn’t steer your car.) But data is hugely important for
keeping the wheels on the road, the car in its lane, and the destina-
tion firmly in sight. So, like many, I prefer to talk about “data-informed
design.” I can’t imagine doing UX design or product management the
way we used to, almost entirely based on our guts or at best some up-
front research and then hit or miss based on what we could gather
about some traffic, some clicks, and some sales.
Today, many of us are spoiled. You may have the opportunity to
work on well-instrumented products for which you can examine the
user pathways and stumbling blocks in an incredibly fine-grained
way. We all have so much more information now about what is hap-
pening, but it’s important to remember that these funnels, retention
curves, clusters, and so on almost never tell us why anything is
happening. Fortunately, they do frequently suggest hypotheses that
we can explore and test through experimentation.
UX today, in mature organizations, includes using the design toolkit
to solve problems and shape experiences to test hypotheses and learn
through experimentation which experience works best, which design
suits best, and which solution delivers the improved results you’re
looking for.
So, if you practice UX with that little bit of the scientist (or possibly
mad scientist) spirit, combined with the artist’s creative ability to har-
ness the unconscious to make leaps and craft novel solutions, then
you’ll find this experience and sensibility a perfect fit for product
management.

48 Chapter 3
If none of these data concepts make sense, then you may have a some-
what larger gap to fill before transitioning to product. So when you
work with product managers, you can start by asking to be included in
conversations about the data they are reviewing, and interpret what it
appears to be telling them about the current designs and their needs
and expectations for UX, as they seek to meet further goals.
Leading Through Influence
Over many years of mentoring up-and-coming UX practitioners,
I’ve often found that people are looking for opportunities to become
leaders. This is probably the second most common theme I encounter
in coaching after “Do I need to become a manager to get promoted?”
It’s not unusual to hear this desire framed in fairly mundane terms.
“How do I get promoted to lead designer?” “How do I become a
principal designer?” “How do I get to be in charge?”
My advice usually boils down to telling folks that leadership is usu-
ally demonstrated rather than bestowed. When you are deciding who
from a team to promote into a leadership role, the first thing you look
for is who is already leading people?
Leaders lead and do not wait to be assigned the task of leading. I’m
not talking about petty power grabs and declaring yourself to be in
charge of things, but more nuanced things like filling voids that need
addressing, catching things before they fall, refocusing a meandering
meeting to bring it back to the decision to be made, and going to the
whiteboard with a marker to clarify the terms of the debate or the
details and consequences of two possible logical flows.
Great UX designers lead all the time. They build consensus. They
persuade and influence. They marshal arguments and (yes) data.
They use their visualization skills to sketch diagrams and models
that help communicate and clarify. They surface contradictions and
embrace them as design challenges or constraints. They facilitate
workshops that get everyone on the same page.
Does any of this sound familiar? These are all things that product
managers do.
Product managers are rarely people managers (unless they are
product leads managing other product managers). The designers,
developers, sales people, data scientists, business analysts, customer
success professionals, customer support staff, and the marketing

UX Skills That Carry Over 49
team do not report to the product manager. Setting yourself up
as a dictator and trying to just tell everyone else what to do is a
nonstarter. A PM leads by persuasion, by influence, and by making
everyone else’s life easier.
Product Managers Are from Mars . . .
When UX designers tell me they are thinking about becoming a
product manager, one of the things I always try to mention quickly
is how different the day-to-day work really tends to be. This may not
be obvious immediately, especially since I have been emphasizing
the common ground, the shared values, even the small pool of over-
lapping skills and techniques and concerns, but it’s worth noting
that the craft work differs greatly. Where designers frequently spend
much of their time in various drawing programs or other tools for
making prototypes, a product manager typically spends most of the
day communicating and consuming information.
I’ve known some designers with terrible spelling and grammar,
almost as a point of pride. They do the visuals. The colors, the
proportions, the layout, even the typography, but writing? That’s
someone else’s job. (Of course there are UXs writer and content strat-
egists and so on who already write for a living.) Product managers
write a lot—email, specs, more email, Slack messages, user stories,
hypotheses, reports, roadmap entries, bug reports, sprint retrospec-
tives, you name it. There’s a lot of writing involved.
Once the email is caught up and the spec work is done, there may
be some meetings, ideally scheduled in a way that doesn’t interrupt
the precious “maker time” of designers and programmers. They are
acutely aware that meetings count as productivity for you, the PM,
but not so much for them.
When you’re not writing things down so that anybody who ever
encounters it will understand it without reference to any prior
knowledge, you’ll be facilitating crisp on-point stand-ups. Or kick-
offs or working meetings. And when you’re not in meetings, you’ll
spend several hours every day either poring through spreadsheets or
MySQL output or analytics package charts and diagrams. And when
you’re not diving deeply into data, you’ll be reading reports, studies,
research, articles, and anything else you can get your hands on to feed
your insatiable need to make the next round of changes and improve-
ments to your product so that it can continue to grow and progress.

50 Chapter 3
Key Insights
• UX is allowed to say “it depends,” but product needs to
make a decision.
• Product cares about the user experience and may even direct
it in some cases, but doesn’t do the design work directly.
• There is a large set of skills that overlap between UX and
product, and these can be a good foundation for changing
careers. Review your strengths across this spectrum and look
for ways to complement and strengthen the weaker areas.
• Information architecture is a product manager superpower
that’s incredibly useful for articulating and visualizing
meaning and relationships and fostering consensus about
the shared concerns of the team.
• User researchers are natural allies to product manag-
ers, and UX research experience is a good foundation for
product work.
• The use of design to develop experiments and test hypoth-
eses and the measurement of design impact through user
data and key performance metrics carries over from sophis-
ticated UX design practices to the core day-to-day obsessions
of product managers.
• Product managers spend a lot more time with columns of
numbers and bulleted lists than they do with the visual
design of screens.

CHAPTER 4
Wrangling
Engineers
Keep Engineering Teams Aligned 52
What’s Your Definition of “Done”? 60
Iterative Process Improvement Through Retrospectives 62
Getting Results from Engineers 63
Estimation and Negotiation 65
Key Insights 68

52 Chapter 4
A
big part of the product manager’s job is providing engi-
neers with everything they need in order to be productive.
Sometimes the product manager feels their job is to tell the
engineers what to do, but they quickly learn that this is like herding
cats. Even with the best of intentions, it’s just not the natural way
of things.
Your job instead is to provide focus, direction, and meaning and to
make sure that goals are clear, requests are well-scoped, and engi-
neers are core participants in the conversation and ideation needed
to craft solutions.
Sure, you want people to do things. You give direction, and you should
always be willing and able to express a strong point of view, even if
you need to come up with one on the spot. But you’re not a dictator.
Engineers don’t report to you, 99% of the time, nor should they.
But they are part of your team, a team you need to nurture and foster
and make as productive as possible, so researching problems, defin-
ing requirements, and clarifying nuances all help your engineers
focus on what they do best. (Motivating, persuading, and rallying
them also comes with the territory.)
Also, remember, engineers are makers. Unless they are managers
themselves (in which case they are your adjacent colleagues in
many things), they are creators who benefit from large stretches of
uninterrupted time in which they can summon up complex mental
models of the problem, solution, algorithm, or logical issue they are
working through.
For this reason, try not to harry engineers with micro-interruptions,
but instead focus your communication, feedback, and direction into
asynchronous written formats that the developers can review when it
suits them and the regular cadences of Agile scrum rituals.
Keep Engineering Teams Aligned
At this point in your UX career, you likely have at least passing
familiarity with things like stand-ups and sprints, but you may not
have always had them as a routine part of your day or week. Product
managers set their clocks by these “rituals,” which are formally
structured meetings generally focused on syncing and recalibrating,
but can also be prospective or retrospective depending on where you
are in a given cycle.

Wrangling Engineers 53
These cycles (daily stand-ups, weekly sprint rituals, monthly road-
map updates, quarterly planning) are collectively referred to as
cadences and together represent your primary channel for collaborat-
ing with and providing direction to engineers.
Cadences
You can think of these recurring patterns as fractals. You do the same
thing over and over again at each scale, and the stakes get higher by
an order of magnitude at each longer cadence as well.
For almost every Agile team, the smallest cadence is the daily stand-
up (Figure 4.1). Traditionally, this is done standing up to remind
everyone that it is a quick check-in and not a detailed working ses-
sion. Each person reports on what they accomplished since last time,
what they plan to get done in the next day, and what, if anything, is
blocking their progress.
FIGURE 4.1
Just as it sounds, Agile teams check
in once per (working) day to review
progress, next steps, and blockers.
The daily stand-up is just one of the scrum rituals (from backlog
grooming to sprint planning to demo, product acceptance, and
retrospective) that takes place during the sprint, which will typically
last from two to four weeks (see Figure 4.2).
FIGURE 4. 2
Throughout the sprint, there
will be other rituals that
take place at the beginning,
middle, or end.
Once a month, it’s a good idea to review the roadmap to make sure
that the Now items are all progressing as planned, the list of Next
items is still current and accurate, preparations are being made for
when those items move into Now, and all other ideas beyond the
current horizon are captured under Later (Figure 4.3).

54 Chapter 4
FIGURE 4.3
Because roadmaps may not be formally updated more than once a
quarter, it’s a good idea to review the roadmap once a month to see if
things are on track or drifting.
In addition to monthly roadmap reviews, some companies, such
as Intercom, divide each quarter into two six-week chunks with a
“wiggle week” in between.
Once a quarter, it’s time for the product team, along with all other
stakeholders, to review progress against the goals going in from the
start, define goals for the quarter ahead, and review progress against
the annual plan (Figure 4.4).
FIGURE 4.4
Quarterly planning provides structure for the four to six sprints ahead.

Wrangling Engineers 55
Once a year, you can take stock at how the year went compared with
the plans made at the end of the previous year, marvel at how many
things occurred that were not anticipated, take those learnings,
revisit the vision, mission, 5-, 10- or even 20-year goals, and come up
with a working plan for the year ahead (see Figure 4.5).
FIGURE 4.5
Time for that annual company retreat!
At every level, there are some simple principles at work to help main-
tain alignment and correct your steering at every scale. Just as the
“lean” concept builds on the cornerstone cycle of “build, measure,
learn” (repeat), “Agile” practices follow a very similar ethos that boils
down to “iterate, review, recalibrate” (repeat), combined with the idea
that at every scale your goal should be to complete something that
can be reviewed, tested, and either sent back for more changes or
accepted.
Threaded throughout Agile principles and practices is this approach
to routine course-correction “with a preference to the shorter time-
scale” (Principles Behind the Agile Manifesto).
Only one of the original twelve Agile principles (the last one)
spells out this notion directly, when addressing systematic iterative
improvement of team processes over time:
At regular intervals, the team reflects on how to become more
effective, then tunes and adjusts its behavior accordingly.

56 Chapter 4
If you pause a moment to reflect, this is fairly “meta”—it basically takes
the power of this deceptively simple idea (of routinely reviewing and
course-correcting) and tells you to apply it to how the team itself is
working as a whole, and not just to the code getting written and tested.
Very powerful stuff!
Sprint Planning
The hands-on tactical day-to-day world of a product manager revolves
around engineering sprints (and, in some dual-track systems, on
staggered discovery/UX/design sprints as well). You generally have a
very good sense of where you are in the sprint at any given time, and
your daily stand-ups should be keeping you abreast of progress, as
well as blockers (things that are preventing developers or others from
completing their tasks) and nonblocking problems.
Sprint planning is a process and often a meeting for determining
which user stories, bug fixes, or other engineering tasks will be
scheduled for the sprint about to start. This is a negotiation among
all concerned, but primarily between product and engineering.
The candidate issues come from your backlog. An ungroomed
backlog is simply a long list of proposed ideas, tasks, wish list items,
and so on. They need to be reasonably well specified before they
can be considered for a sprint. The process of putting the backlog
into a priority order and making sure that the items at the top of the
backlog are ready to hand off to an engineer is called grooming the
backlog (Figure 4.6).
SAFe
® 
IS A DOUBLE-EDGED SWORD
You find yourself working in a shop that has adopted SAFe
®
(Scaled Agile Framework
® 
for enterprise). I am sorry to tell you
that SAFe
® 
is the devil. It’s a corporate set of formal agile-style
processes that create what is often called “agilefall,” reinventing
the waterfall project plan (the exact thing the Agile Manifesto was
rebelling against) with the trappings of rigid interpretations of
Agile rituals. Having said that, shops that use SAFe
® 
often derive a
benefit from the approach as compared with what they replaced it
with, and in that sense, it can be viewed as a step in the right direc-
tion in the difficult challenge of asking a large corporate enterprise
to fully embrace the most difficult aspects of agility.

Wrangling Engineers 57
FIGURE 4.6
Many teams manage their backlogs in a project management tool such
as Jira (shown here).
There are multiple methods for estimating and scoring effort, and
then comparing estimated effort for the desired tasks against the
available time and resource budget. Early tries at sprint planning
often underestimate overhead, meeting, managerial, and operational
time (not to mention setbacks and learning experiences), but within a
few cycles most teams get a collective feel for their rough capacity.
During a Sprint
During the sprint, you may need to add new items or demote some to
the backlog again. Part of being agile is adapting to changing cir-
cumstances, but this can sometimes make it hard to measure actual
results vs. plans using such items as burndown charts. The team
learns faster if everyone can see clearly the gap between estimates
and plans on one side and actual results and outcomes on the other
(see Figure 4.7).

58 Chapter 4
FIGURE 4.7
A sample burndown chart in Jira from Atlassian that shows a sprint
going off track near the end.
Many teams use Kanban as a project-management tracking method
during sprints. This is a model in which real or virtual sticky notes
summarizing user stories or tasks are moved from one column to the
next as they progress through the software development workflow
(Figure 4.8).
FIGURE 4.8
A prototypical Kanban
setup.

Wrangling Engineers 59
When a team is colocated in one physical location, there can be a real
Kanban board with sticky notes on it, where everyone can see tasks
moving through the workflow (Figure 4.9).
FIGURE 4.9
When a team works together in a shared space, a real physical Kanban board
can provide at-a-glance transparency into progress.
But many teams, and not just distributed or remote ones, tend to use
Kanban-style software these days. Trello, for example, is a wildly
popular Kanban-type software that many product teams swear by,
and most of the tools that support sprint-planning and other Agile
project management processes now offer a Kanban view (Figure 4.10).
Another aspect of PMing should feel familiar from your UX experi-
ence: responding to issues that arise during a sprint. This can be
a matter of clarifying a specification, filling in a gap to address
an unanticipated scenario (anything from an error case to a clash
between requirements that could be resolved in multiple ways),
working with the designer to address challenges in implementing
the design as delivered, or getting in front of a whiteboard with the
developer and others to work through system-level choices.

60 Chapter 4
FIGURE 4.10
A Kanban board helps visualize progress across multiple concurrent
priorities.
What’s Your Definition of “Done”?
A sticking point for many teams making software and trying to be
agile about it is how to know when something is done. As you get
down into the weeds, there always seems to be more that you could
do. There are almost always some bugs that are borderline in terms
of not impacting people in very many scenarios and not causing
severe inconvenience (usually because there are easy enough work-
arounds). There are always some edge cases that the code doesn’t
handle perfectly yet. There may be long-tail mobile devices that don’t
pass every test. The closer you look, the more you will see.
But a big part of the product role is making these tough calls, the ones
that might go either way, but that if you get too many of them wrong

Wrangling Engineers 61
will either delay your project unacceptably or, worse, deliver buggy
code and terrible experiences in the interest of keeping to a schedule.
But, again, the product manager is not a dictator. Instead, it’s incum-
bent upon the PM to take responsibility for establishing a “definition
of done” that everyone on the team buys into.
This definition usually ties back to the requirements documents that
defined the original problem space and specified what the solution
needed to achieve to address these problems. If everyone signs off on
a definition of done, then it shouldn’t be controversial later when a
PM needs to say “we can’t ship this if some users will lose their data”
or “if it doesn’t run on Android devices,” and so on.
The definition of done also means coded, tested, and accepted.
Without clearly defining that a thing isn’t done until it has passed
through the entire workflow, there is a risk of constant slippage from
sprint to sprint as chunks of code are called “done” because they
were built before the sprint expired, but they still need to be tested in
the next sprint and possibly revamped further, depending on what
testing reveals.
Finally, clearly defining what it means for something to be done can
help avoid the paralysis of perfectionism. Product management is no
job for a perfectionist! Remember the Reid Hoffman line about how
if you’re not a little bit embarrassed by the product you shipped, then
you waited too long to get it out the door?
Product managers have a saying: “Good enough is good enough.”
It’s an excellent reminder that your job is to ship a product that does
the job for your customers, solves their problems, and provides them
with enough value that they embrace your solution. It’s not about
winning an award or shipping “bug-free code.”
Many product teams find it valuable to schedule a demo day at the
end of a sprint. This is a meeting usually open to anyone interested,
in which engineers demonstrate the working code they built during
the sprint. The demo day can be part of the formal product accep-
tance ritual by which the PM declares the shipped code accepted
or identifies gaps in the form of unmet requirements. It also gives
other stakeholders a chance to see progress and a preview of what is
coming soon, and to give the developers a moment in the sun after
all those hours of coding in front of a screen, often sequestered away
from the rest of the company.

62 Chapter 4
Iterative Process Improvement Through
Retrospectives
At the end of a sprint, the product manager is responsible for making
sure that a final key Agile ritual, the retrospective meeting, takes
place in a facilitated way. This retrospective meeting may involve
convening and facilitating the retro directly, but even in cases where
a product owner or scrum master runs the meeting, the product
manager still participates and pays close attention.
The motivation for this ritual comes from that 12th principle of
reviewing team processes and improving them constantly. To pre-
pare, the team is asked to reflect on two key questions: “What went
well?” and “What can we improve?” and to suggest specific actions
that team members might want to take based on what was learned
during the sprint just ending.
Using a tool such as EasyRetro, the team can pre-populate a chart
with their own items, as well as comment on or vote for each other’s
items (Figure 4.11). FYI, don’t call them postmortems, as that’s a little
bit morbid.
FIGURE 4.11
A retrospective enables the team to celebrate and reinforce effective behaviors
and patterns and to reflect on frustrations and setbacks in a constructive way.
The PM should facilitate a non-blame-oriented discussion both rein-
forcing the reflections on what went well and making space to explore
what went wrong and how such matters can be handled better in the
future. As team members suggest affirmative steps drawn from those
insights, these steps can be voted on and prioritized as well.

Wrangling Engineers 63
When practiced in an open and healthy, supportive way, team
retrospectives can spur incredible advances in team cohesion, coordi-
nation, and effectiveness.
Getting Results from Engineers
While it’s critical to keep the wheels rolling and the trains running,
ultimately the scrum-master-ish, product “owner” aspects of the
product management job are tactical and task-based. Diligence and
experience usually suffice to equip a PM to run sprints and manage a
backlog. But none of that addresses the so-called “soft skills” related
to people management and bridging cultural divides in multidisci-
plinary teams where people with different training and inclinations
often speak entirely different “business dialects.”
Giving Respect
Step one is to show respect for engineers. Respect doesn’t mean
rolling over for them or taking no for an answer without an explana-
tion. But it may mean dropping the unfortunate attitude some user
experience people take that presumes that they and they alone care
about the user, about the experience, and about quality, and that the
developers are a bunch of unfeeling automata who just want to crank
out code and call it a day.
A key way to show respect is to learn the lingo. Design means
something different when an engineer is talking about their “techni-
cal design” (a document capturing how they plan to implement the
product requirements). Lecturing them that they are using the word
design incorrectly and then giving them ten minutes on the history of
design and human factors isn’t going to win over anyone.
The UX skills you can and must use are your ability to research and
understand the needs and motivations of a person. The experience
you are designing in this context is not a software product but work-
ing with you. If you approach this with humility, you will find that
you can meet your engineers more than halfway and present your
goals and needs in terms they understand and appreciate.
This will take time, a lot of listening, and a conscious effort to study
and understand the “folkways” of people who are different from
yourself. Of course, it will help if you are already something of a
nerd, geek, or technophile yourself (and let’s be honest, you probably
are). Lean into that, and you’re already halfway there.

64 Chapter 4
Earning Respect
Besides showing respect and humility and a willingness to engage
on engineering’s terms, a product manager also needs to earn the
respect of the developers they work with, if they want to have any
hope of guidance and leading the team to a successful outcome. The
bar for earning respect may be set higher for product managers who
did not come from an engineering background, don’t write code, and
aren’t framed as “technical product managers.”
This new-fangled UX design–rooted type of PM therefore needs to
stake out some technical bona fides if they’re not to be written off
as a jumped-up designer who “doesn’t really get” technology or
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
NO JOB SHOULD BE BENEATH A PRODUCT MANAGER
Ken Norton, a product consultant, adviser, and educator who was
at Google Ventures for many years, crystalized the service aspect
of the product role with the mantra “bring the donuts”:
“I believe the best product managers are willing to do whatever
it takes to help their teams succeed. An important aspect of that
is recognizing that PMs often have to do the work that would fall
through the cracks otherwise. By definition, that can be grimy,
un-fun work: cleaning the bug queue, organizing a document
repository, replying to a customer support email. No job should be
beneath a product manager. PMs are more humble servants than
‘CEOs of the product.’ They put their teams first, they do what
needs to be done, and they demonstrate that every day.
“In 2005, I was preparing to give a talk at Berkeley’s Haas School of
Business about product management. I was looking for a rhetorical
device to convey this, and I settled on ‘bring the donuts.’ If PMs
don’t bring donuts for the team on launch day, who else will? I’m
not sure why I picked donuts. At the time, my competitive cycling
career was still flourishing, and bagels were more my style. But
donuts it was, and the concept stuck.
“If a product manager bears in mind that their role is to do whatever
it takes to make the team successful, then they won’t go wrong.”

Wrangling Engineers 65
programming, just as the business-oriented PMs always have had to
do as well.
But how do you establish these bona fides without essentially going
back to school and becoming an engineer yourself? You don’t do it by
pretending to be what you’re not or nodding along as if you under-
stand a technical point when you don’t. And you won’t get there if
you’re afraid to look ignorant by asking a question.
You do it by asking smart questions. What are smart questions?
When in doubt, they are all the questions you authentically have.
When you’re unclear on terms, ask to clarify them. Show that you
have some understanding of what might be meant, but that you want
to follow along precisely. The more you engage, the more your own
mental model of the technical architecture, logic, approach, coding
style, strengths and limitations of libraries, and deep knowledge of
the capabilities of your team will deepen and strengthen.
When the time comes to ask for something new or to propose an idea,
you’ll then be able to ground your requests in the constraints and
realities of the technical stack you’re working on and avoid something
embarrassing, like asking if they can build you a flying pony.
Estimation and Negotiation
You may recall that sprint planning involves estimation, and that
the product role requires constant negotiation with your team-
mates—but it need not feel like haggling in a bazaar. The product
manager can set the tone for how differences of opinion and priority
are aired and weighed. The product manager should also recognize
what inspires the engineers and what frightens them, which can help
you read between the lines when they resist something you want
to do or when their estimate for the effort required surprises you in
some way.
Estimation is a topic unto itself, fraught with frustration and nearly
impossible to do really well, but it’s a daily requirement of the work
and becomes manageable as long as everyone approaches it as a best-
effort approach to figuring out where to invest time and resources.
And remember, you are not their boss. (At least, that’s true most of
the time.) Your job is to inspire and persuade, not to command.

66 Chapter 4
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
LEARNING HOW YOUR ENGINEERS ESTIMATE
At one point, I had a team of two engineers that I privately thought of
as “Jack Sprat and His Wife” because their inclinations were so comple-
mentary. One of the engineers, let’s call her Cheryl, saw risk everywhere,
padded her estimates out of prudence from long experience of how
things go wrong if they can and distractions are inevitable, etc. The other
engineer, let’s call him Edgar, always envisioned a clear path, enthusiasti-
cally said yes to everything, and tended to underestimate actual effort by
a factor of 4x.
Between the two of them, I could usually get a handle on the likely real
effort, and by facilitating discussion among the three of us, I helped miti-
gate each of their strong inclinations with some balancing considerations.
It’s not as though they ever talked each other round to adopting a new
temperament, mind you, but we managed to soften some of the edges.
And there is an old tradition among engineers that the Trekkers among us
may recall from the original show when the captain would pipe down to the
engine room to ask how long it would take to repair damage and the chief
engineer, Scotty, would estimate eight hours, only to be told “You’ve got
two!” and somehow he always managed to meet these impossible goals.
As a child, I thought this was a testament to necessity being the mother of
invention and heroic leadership, but in retrospect, I came to understand
that Scotty was padding his estimates.
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AN AGENCY PM
Ana Giraldo-Wingler, product manager at Coforma (coforma.io)
I check Slack when I wake up. I come to my computer 15 to 30 minutes
before my first stand-up and create a note for the day in the Notes app
before I start work, as soon as I sit down. I go to my note from the previous
day and copy over all the items that are still not done yet, and I put it into
my next day.
We do work for clients, which is different from being a PM at a start-up. The
particular client that we’re working with is the government, and the product
that I’m working on is a replacement of a 20-year-old piece of software.
So our requirements in a sense are different. It’s not like we’re building
something that’s never existed.
How each day is going to go really does depend on where we are within
that sprint cycle. The first thing I think is “which Agile ceremonies either just
occurred or are coming up?” If I know we have our sprint review coming up
in two days on a Friday, my Wednesday is going to involve prepping the deck

Wrangling Engineers 67
that I’m using to introduce the sprint review. I’m prepping the board to make
sure that all the tickets are up-to-date and in the right list, etc.
As the PM, I have to facilitate communication between the engineering,
design, and business layers so that things are moving in a smooth fashion.
So the first Wednesday of the two-week sprint, we have a UX stand-up
with myself, the UX designer, and our researcher, which is scheduled for 15
minutes, but ends up usually being 30.
Then we have our actual stand-up, which is 30 minutes after the UX
check-in—both of which occur daily. That’s the whole team, including the
developers, and we also have a project lead, which is interesting. I’ve never
worked as a PM on a project where there was a lead as well as a PM. That’s
a symptom of being part of an agency where she’s in charge of the contract
and our relationship with the main client. It allows me to focus on the
product things rather than on client management.
The next thing that I have is a meeting about delivery scenarios and data-
base access with our tech lead because we are currently working with the
government trying to get access to their infrastructure. It’s taking longer
than we anticipated, so we don’t have the access that we need in order
to build what we need to build. So that means we need to do a change of
contract modification.
There’s a break I have here from 11:00 a.m. to noon, and sometimes I will
have to take my lunch early due to the East coast correlation.
Then we have a meeting with stakeholders within the government to talk
about some open design/product questions that we had with them. We’ve
tested them with users. We’ve gotten some feedback, and now we have
some questions for the stakeholders to get their input on our iteration.
Then we have another meeting with different stakeholders called a co-
design session with them, which is really fun because these guys are so
creative and excited, and they’ve been using the current product for so
long. They’ve been accumulating all these ideas for how to improve it. One
of them actually built the original product in the nineties, and the other
one has been using the product. So the co-creation is with people who are
deeply knowledgeable about it. We literally have Figma open, and we have
our designs, and we’re dragging things around. That’s cool.
We also have to coordinate with a different organization that’s building the
API that we’re building our app on top of, to make sure they’re giving us the
data that we need in the format that we need it in. Attending their working
sessions with their stakeholders keeps us abreast of what they’re doing.
I’ll usually pop into those and just listen for anything that might sound
concerning, or that might not have been on my radar.
At this point, it’s afternoon, like 4:00 p.m., and I have time to look at my
Notes file for the day again to see what I still need to do. Sometimes your
calendar’s a brick wall, but also you have tickets to write and you have
questions to answer. It’s like meetings are work, but there’s also other work.
It’s tempting to try to work during some meetings, which isn’t great, but
sometimes that needs to happen.

68 Chapter 4
Key Insights
• Engineers, like designers, are makers, and managers,
including PMs, should be thoughtful about when and how to
interrupt their creative flow.
• Product managers engage with their developers in a series of
check-in cycles of increasing timescale called cadences.
• Day-to-day tactical PM work revolves around sprints that
tend to last two to four weeks.
• Working with engineers effectively depends on cultivating
mutual respect, both by showing interest and fluency with
technical concepts and programmer folkways and by engag-
ing intelligently in clarifying discussions about technical
matters while gaining mastery of the technical architecture
and landscape.
• A product manager has to learn how to negotiate and
collaborate with engineers by being very attentive to their
drives, concerns, and patterns of behavior.

CHAPTER 5
The Business
of Product Is
Business
Build Sustainable Value 70
Thinking in Terms of the Market 70
Targeting a Market 71
Finding Product-Market Fit 74
What Is the Go-to-Market Plan? 77
Customer Obsession 79
Launching vs. Optimizing 80
Business Operations 81
Financial Business Skills 82
Business-to-Business (B2B) Products 83
Key Insights 86

70 Chapter 5
F
or many designers, business is a dirty word. It conjures
up images of “suits” who don’t care about users — er,
humans . . . no, people — the way you do, of bean counters, and
of overseers cracking the whip and driving “death marches” to hit
arbitrary dates and ship the requisite number of lines of code.
This isn’t fair, of course, and not only does it represent a barrier to
overcome if you want to go down the product management career
path, but any such aversion to the business side of software develop-
ment can hamper your UX growth and development as well.
Build Sustainable Value
As you know by now, the role of a product manager is to build value.
This goal deliberately leaves unstated to whom that value accrues.
As a user experience expert, naturally you will think in terms of
valuable experiences for your customers who are deriving value from
using your product.
The business, the organization that is building and delivering this
software, also needs to reap some of the value being generated, in
order to sustain itself and live. Paying attention to that side of the
equation doesn’t make you greedy or uncaring, and going out of
business because you can’t figure out how to make a living selling
your valuable wares will equally deprive your customers of the
virtues of what you’re making.
Getting the balance right means neither raking too much value off
the top so that the quality suffers, nor leaving too much value on the
table so that the business fails to sustain itself.
So what is unsustainable value? Offering your services at a loss to
corner a market is unsustainable. Building a business that can only
scale by adding more staff is unsustainable. Making a profit by exter-
nalizing the costs of your business and in the process destroying the
infrastructure and environment necessary for the operation of the
market is also not sustainable.
Thinking in Terms of the Market
Sometimes you hear a word so often that you don’t stop to think
about what it means. Market can mean several things—from the place
where people buy and sell (such as a farmers’ market or supermar-
ket) to the more abstract markets where securities are exchanged. In

The Business of Product Is Business 71
the context of this book, the word market really just means “a specific
category of potential buyers.”
Both UX and product management share roots in 20th century market-
ing business practices. In many ways, user experience is just a newer
model of understanding and addressing the needs of customers, which
has always been the primary goal of marketing efforts. Also, product
management derives some of its DNA from product marketing (and
still collaborates or overlaps with marketing departments around the
product marketing concept in many organizations).
Product management goals often revolve around three stages of
engagement with a product market:
• Identify and target a juicy market.
• Deeply understand its problems and needs, and then design and
develop a solution to that problem that “fits the market.”
• Figure out a way to bring the solution to the target market.
Targeting a Market
The earliest stage of the product life cycle focuses on identifying a
suitable market to “go after” in the first place. This needs to be one
that has a real problem you can solve, and it also needs to be a big
enough market to justify investing a lot of time and energy and tak-
ing on the risk of a new venture.
Sizing a Market
When you are trying to determine what market to go after, or if a
particular market is large or needy enough to sustain your line of
business, it’s tempting to cast the net as wide as possible. Who is this
product for? Everybody on the planet! Adults age 24 to 65. Right-
handed people! But the problem then becomes “How do you target
such a vaguely defined heterogeneous group?” If you’re not selling
fizzy sugar water, how do you leap directly to mass appeal?
Now if your target market is “adults in the United States aged 18–35
who are thinking about buying their first new car,” you’ve got some
definition there to work with and a much better chance of crafting
experiences and narratives that reach this market.
Once you have a handle on the types of people you are trying to
serve, you can do some basic Google-type research to get a rough

72 Chapter 5
idea of the size of that market overall. Then you’ll need to come up
with and justify the percentage of that market that you think you can
reasonably obtain as customers.
NOTE DO YOUR OWN RESEARCH
Matt LeMay says, “Honestly, 90% of ‘research’ for product man-
agers is just ‘Googling stuff.’”
Here is where numeracy really helps. It’s amazing how often people
reason something like this about markets: “Well, there are a hundred
million people in my target market, so I only need to reach 10%
of them to have ten million customers!” or even “. . . I only need to
reach 1% of them to have a million customers!” and sure, 10% is only
a small part of the whole and jeez 1% is tiny! However, the ease of
capturing “a mere 1%” is an illusion that is based on a huge denomi-
nator (Figure 5.1).
FIGURE 5.1
Reaching 100,000 customers out of a target market of 10,000,000 vs.
200,000 customers out of a better-defined target market of 5,000,000
isn’t easier just because 1% sounds smaller than 4%.

The Business of Product Is Business 73
It’s not significantly easier (or even necessarily easier at all) to reach a
million customers out of a target market of a hundred million than it
is to reach a million customers out of a target market of four million.
It definitely affects how and where you target your messaging and
how you understand the needs of the market segment you are going
after, but having a rough idea of the size of the potential market is
really just the first step.
Gauging Interest
After you’ve identified your target market, it’s time to better under-
stand what the people in that market are crying out for and whether
what you are offering (or planning to make for them) is even some-
thing they would need.
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
WHERE THERE’S SMOKE . . .
One product I worked on, CloudOn, was a document editor for
iPads before Word or Google Docs were available there. Jay Zaveri,
chief product officer (and my boss and mentor at CloudOn), estab-
lished that there was a market demand for “Word on the iPad” in
the face of skepticism that anybody would want to do “real work”
on a tablet.
The way he made the case to the rest of the leadership team and
the company’s board was by taking out a relatively cheap Google
AdWords buy that said something along the lines of “Word is
coming to the iPad! Sign up to be notified when it’s here.” (This is
sometimes called a smokescreen test.)
He quickly gathered thousands and then tens of thousands of
email addresses from people who were eager to do productive
work on their convenient portable touch-screen devices. Not
only did the upsurge in interest help justify the R&D direction
that eventually led to a native gesture-based document editor for
tablets (and a collaborative model for working with cloud docu-
ments that lives on today after CloudOn’s sale to Dropbox), but it
also helped with the initial go-to-market plan.

74 Chapter 5
UX SUPERPOWER ALERT
RESEARCH, RESEARCH, RESEARCH
At this point, you should be back in your own wheelhouse! After
all, we’re talking about user research now, so you can draw on all
of your previous skills and experiences. User experience research
is no different than market research — you’re looking to identify
potential customers, pain points, needs, and mental models.
There are many ways to gauge interest in and validate an idea.
Some are more qualitative—to the point of being anecdotal or
potentially limited to confirmation bias—that is, if you only inves-
tigate like-minded people. Other methods are more qualitative and
evidence based.
Finding Product-Market Fit
The next product phase addressing “markets” is the ubiquitous
search for product-market fit. Despite the mystique this phrase has
accrued (What is it? How do you know when you have it?), there’s
nothing tricky about these words. It literally just means that the
product fits the needs of the market in some demonstrable way. But
the phrase is also used to describe a stage in the life of a product or
a product company.
Before achieving product-market fit, a product is still in search of a
sustainable relationship with its customers. At this stage, it makes no
sense to optimize things or to invest in heavily engineered aspects
of the solution because you really don’t know yet how badly people
want what you’re offering. The whole job right now is to find that
product-market fit by paying close attention to what initial customers
and their behaviors are telling you, by understanding as effectively
as you can why noncustomers are staying away or failing to convert,
and by experimenting relentlessly until things click.
Searching for product-market fit is a huge part of early-stage PM
work, such as angel-funded start-ups and enterprises opening new
lines of business or launching entirely new products in existing
lines. For other PMs, product-market fit is a done deal, and the job
has more to do with optimizing functionality, growing the market,
upselling, and so on.
Now, to be totally honest, as with so many other rubrics, the concept
of product-market fit is both subjective and somewhat arbitrary.

The Business of Product Is Business 75
Like the stone in the “stone soup” parable, it provides an anchoring
concept that enables good things to happen, but don’t treat it like an
objective yes/no fact. Even if you’re measuring a quantity as a proxy
for it, treat it like a qualitative thing.
“If They’ll Crawl Through Glass . . . ”
The holy grail for some entrepreneurial-minded product folks is a
company that has achieved product-market fit with a lousy product.
How is that possible? Well, if people want something badly enough,
they will crawl through glass to get it. This does not mean that lining
your entranceway with broken glass is a great user experience. It
means that what you are offering meets people’s needs to such an
extent that they will put up with a subpar experience to get it.
This kind of scenario is a gold mine because it suggests that simply
by improving the product experience in fairly straightforward ways,
you will be able to capitalize on the inherent value and appeal of the
product experience and service being offered, reduce bounce and
churn, help more people understand and engage with the product,
and ultimately reach much greater markets beyond the early adopt-
ers willing to put up with all those cuts.
7 CUPS
A big reason why I took on the head of product role at 7 Cups, a
mental health community, was that just a little over a year since
its founding as a YCombinator start-up, it was demonstrating that
“crawl through glass” level of product-market fit.
The entire service was built by one engineer using ready-made
web technologies and services, and it had grown in a sprawling
organic way by responding to feedback from early adopters, so as a
product, it left a lot to be desired. It was unfocused. It wasn’t clear
how to get started. It offered too many options that seemed similar
to each other and too many navigation choices. Nevertheless, it
was growing at a rapid clip.
Whatever 7 Cups had to offer (which was on-demand support
from real people, with minimal waiting) was compelling and
desirable enough that people were willing to put up with a lot
of subpar “plumbing” and product experience to get it. What a
ripe opportunity!

76 Chapter 5
Zeroing In on Product-Market Fit
One of the most effective methods for quantifying product-market
fit is to survey existing users and ask them how they would feel if
the product went away. Would they be very disappointed, somewhat
disappointed, or not disappointed at all?
This is subjective, of course, but there is a broad consensus among
investors and product folk that if around 40% of your users would
be “very disappointed” to lose your product, then you have product-
market fit.
So, there are ways to determine whether you have this fit, but what
if you don’t? If the lack of fit comes from not enough customers who
would miss your product if it went away, then the solution is to find
and focus more on those customers who are already in your dedicated
group (the ones who would be “very disappointed” to lose you).
Can you find more of these people and stop going after the rest? Can
you convert more of your customers into feeling the way these people
do? Anything you might want to try will come down to understand-
ing these different subgroups better and learning what distinguishes
them. What are the unique characteristics of the people in your
market who are clamoring for your product?
Rahul Vohra, the founder and CEO of an email product called
Superhuman shared a pretty good tactical process for achieving
product-market fit with a customer base that was not there yet, which
he called the product/market fit engine. He recommended that after
surveying customers in the way just described, that you also ask the
people who loved your product (the ones who would be very disap-
pointed without it) what exactly they loved about it.
Then you segment your users (the market segments will depend on
you, but one example he gave was segmenting people by job title) and
analyze which segments are heavily represented in your strong group.
This process enables you to notice which segments or demographics
to focus on (the ones most strongly represented among those who
love your product) and which to consciously neglect (the ones who
wouldn’t mind if it went away). Then by analyzing what people love
about your product, you can both double down on these things as
you retarget the people, such as your best customers, and also start to
figure out which demographics would be somewhat disappointed but

The Business of Product Is Business 77
could be converted to the “very” group if you offered them things
they would love as well (Figure 5.2).
COURTESY OF RAHUL VOHRA
FIGURE 5. 2
Rahul Vohra’s “product/market fit engine” helps demystify the process of
focusing on the customers most likely to love you back. He explains the
whole process in an article called “How Superhuman Built an Engine to Find
Product/Market Fit.”
What Is the Go-to-Market Plan?
If you’ve identified a market need and believe you’ve got a solution
that fits the problem, you still need to know how to get your product
into the hands of the customers in your target market. Start-ups may
launch first and iterate toward fit, but a mature company that takes
marketing seriously needs to coordinate launches with growth strate-
gies and messaging.
You’ll hear “go-to-market” used as an adjective describing a type of
strategy or plan, also often called a launch plan. Although a product
can go through many launches (new versions, key features, and
so on), go-to-market typically refers to the initial launch of a new
product and its first encounter with the market that it was theoreti-
cally defined to satisfy.

78 Chapter 5
A go-to-market strategy is a comprehensive plan that has the follow-
ing features:
• Promotes awareness of your product in your target market
• Enables people to discover what your product has to offer
• Communicates a narrative in which the potential customer is the
hero and their heroic journey involves embracing your product
• Lines up and coordinates with partners and other business-
development stakeholders
• Produces marketing and potential advertising materials
• Sets the pricing model for the product
• Addresses the personnel and budgetary resources required to
successfully launch the product to its market
Going to market generally involves coordinating with other stake-
holder groups in your organization outside of the product team— most
notably marketing, business development, sales, customer success, and
customer support, but others may be involved as well.
NOTE A ROADMAP VS. A LAUNCH PLAN
Remember that a launch plan is not a product roadmap, but of-
ten when stakeholders ask for the roadmap, they are really asking
for commitments about when features are going to ship. More on
this later, in Chapter 10, “Roadmaps and How to Say ‘No’.”
Go-to-market has also come to be used at times as a noun describing
all of the related activities involved in a go-to-market strategy.
In the case of CloudOn, when it came time to ship version 1 (which
was initially called App2You, believe it or not) of the iPad app to the
App Store, Jay was able to send a promotional email message to the
tens of thousands of eager potential customers who had asked to be
notified when it was available.
This email drove a downloading frenzy that had several immediate
effects:
• CloudOn hit number one in Apple’s productivity apps charts the
day of launch.
• CloudOn hit the top ten list for all apps the day of launch.

The Business of Product Is Business 79
• The prominent ranking in the charts drove much additional
organic downloads beyond the initial group from the mailing list.
• This kept CloudOn high on both charts for several weeks as the
initial surge gradually wore off.
• CloudOn had to limit downloads the first day because the server
infrastructure was overtaxed by the unexpected enthusiasm.
Jay’s initial “bet” that people wanted to work on their iPads was
proven to be correct.
As a product manager, you may be involved with or be required to
develop go-to-market strategies, or you may work on products that
are well established and no longer manage incremental updates and
changes in such an elaborate orchestrated way. Nevertheless, you
should always try to understand and gauge the needs and frustra-
tions of your target market, and every time you experiment with
something new in your product, you need to bear in mind how you
are going to deliver it.
Customer Obsession
Targeting the right customers and optimizing for their love requires
the sort of deep study of users that is the bread and butter for a UX
practitioner. The same fascination with users and proficiencies you
have cultivated to understand their wants and needs will stand you
in great stead in product management. A big part of the PM’s job is to
obsess about customers and to talk to them as frequently as possible.
As a PM, you’ll jump at the chance for any new information about
customers—new survey responses, updated traffic and behavior
data, complaints on social media, reviews on the app store, direct
feedback on existing or proposed designs, and more.
The best product organizations will foster strong ties between the
product team and customer support, customer success, and com-
munity managers who have their fingers directly on the pulse of the
user base. These people should be your new best friends. Often, they
are frustrated by not having a direct conduit to the product team,
and have insights and observations to share that are solid gold for
your understanding.

80 Chapter 5
You can do this in two ways:
• Set up formal processes for syncing, coordinating, and reviewing
data and plans together.
• Alongside the formal cadences of checking in, build up more
informal, back-channel relationships characterized by mutual
support and collaboration.
Launching vs. Optimizing
In some sense, most product managers are always launching some-
thing. It may not be the debut of an entirely new category-defining
product, but in any given sprint, you might be launching the 4.3 ver-
sion of your mobile app, or your new search feature, or an AI chatbot,
or something on a fairly regular basis. The exceptions to this tend to
occur inside huge enterprises with 18-month-long waterfall software
development lifecycle (SDLC) processes, or a no-longer-innovative
business that forever finds excuses to hold off on shipping anything
to avoid rocking the boat.
However, it’s also a generally accepted notion among product leaders
that some product managers are better at launching new things, while
others are better at optimizing things that are already up and running.
Again, this does not mean you have to have one type of PM to launch
your product and then immediately bring in another type to maintain
and optimize it. But on the level of any given product line, product,
feature, or functionality, getting the thing to exist at all deals with one
set of factors. Bringing out the best in it involves another.
It’s a good idea to get a sense of where you think you fall on this
spectrum. Do you relish the exhilaration of launching things into the
unknown? Are you a skydiver at heart? Do you draw energy from
seeing things turn from ideas into reality? Then you’re probably
something of an instigator, and your energy fits well with innovation
and novelty.
Or do you prefer shaping and molding and guiding a team or initia-
tive to its highest level of performance and success? Are you the sort of
person who would rather join the crew of a well-designed, built, and
maintained ship and “find out what it can really do!”? If so, then you
might be more suited to taking on an existing product and improv-
ing it systematically, finding breakthrough opportunities, growing
engagement and profitability, or even evolving it into a platform.

The Business of Product Is Business 81
Maybe both of these things sound great to you, so a tight team where
individual PMs are given wide latitude might suit you best.
These aren’t mutually exclusive tendencies by any means. Hà Phan,
a product leader and general manager at Pluralsight, and one of my
product mentors, put it this way:
For a long time I saw myself as the person who always starts
things but never optimizes. Then when I started building this
team, what evolved over time is I realized that I’m building a
platform, building a system. So the system is a long game. You
can’t go “short game.”
So that’s actually how I see it now: I’m doing both. I’m always
starting new things and I’m always optimizing old things (or
less new things).
Business Operations
Most of the time, if people ask you about your business skills as a
product manager, if they’re not asking about how you go to mar-
ket, then they are thinking of finance or operations and general
management.
You’ve probably picked up on the fact that product management has
a large operational component, drawing both from project manage-
ment (at the tactical product owner/scrum master interface) and
from program management (in the coordination of people, teams and
resources to achieve complex ambitious goals).
Some people became UX designers because they like to draw and are
happiest when someone else is watching the deadlines and cracking
the whip. If that’s you, then product management is likely to feel like
all the boring parts of school to you, with no recess.
But if you’re the sort of UX designer who loves facilitating workshops
and jumps up to the whiteboard to help facilitate a discussion by
helping your colleagues articulate their concerns, or if you’ve tasted
the operational and people management aspects of being a design
manager and found them to your liking, then you’ll likely take to
that “business” aspect of product management readily.
It’s worth noting that all disciplines tend toward people and program
management as you rise through the ranks, so in that sense, this is

82 Chapter 5
less about product managers being business heads and more about
management and organizational leadership in general.
Nonetheless, to be taken seriously as a product manager, you will
need to demonstrate that you can be organized, keep complicated
projects with multiple moving parts aligned and on track, and
have the communication and people skills needed to motivate and
support teams of people as they strive to work together in complex
environments.
UX SUPERPOWER ALERT
STAKEHOLDERS ARE USERS TOO
A huge aspect of getting things done operationally is stakeholder
management. This is another time when interpersonal skills and
an ability to understand people come in handy. Start-up founder
and user experience, research, and product management consul-
tant Noreen Whysel observed: “Your skills that you develop as a
UX designer help you to understand the business needs, because
you can use the same techniques on the business side, on the
stakeholder side, to find out what is it that they need because in
a way, they’re a ‘user’ too.”
Financial Business Skills
When it comes to finance, though, it’s likely you are treading in an
area that never really came up doing UX research, strategy, or design.
Because most of the team does not report to a product manager, PMs
rarely have profit and loss (P&L) ownership over the product they
work on, but even so, it behooves a PM to understand what the team
is costing the business and what monetary value it is delivering.
Not only does this directly bear on how well the team is performing,
but it also gives the PM a heads up if their business unit is a cost
center and potentially vulnerable to the winds of change.
Not all product roles deal with transactions or revenue, but doing the
job always requires a certain degree of savvy about how the money
flows through the business and in and out of the product and the
team building it. Making the case for a strategic priority is always on
some level a competition for scarce resources.

The Business of Product Is Business 83
As a product manager, your responsibility for cultivating and devel-
oping value applies every bit as much to the need to generate literal
financial value to the business (or organization) underwriting the
code you’re developing and shipping, as it accrues to the customer or
end user you’re serving.
For the most part, financial concerns enter the picture in terms of
pricing of product and features, revenue models, and the search for
profitability. More on that in Chapter 8, “Getting the Money.”
Business-to-Business (B2B) Products
Perhaps the product management space that is most steeped in
business thinking and business contexts is B2B (business to business,
as opposed to B2C for business to consumer, B2G for business to
government, and B2B2C for business to business to consumer), mean-
ing businesses whose customers are other businesses. There’s a lot of
money to be made selling tools and services that businesses need to
make their own money. Some have compared this to the Levi Strauss
strategy of getting rich selling canvas and tent stakes to gold miners
instead of going out to pan for gold directly.
In a B2B context, concepts such as markets and customers shift
to become both smaller and less abstract. Sales are made to busi-
nesses, not to individuals. The end user is often not the payer (the
“customer”), which means that delighting the user will not directly
influence their willingness or ability to pay. Also, customers are spe-
cific people at specific businesses known to your sales and account
management colleagues, not the general public or everyone who can
find a Google window, which affects many of your strategies in terms
of understanding user behavior, talking to users and customers, and
even trying to do statistically valid data analyses (something you’ll
hear more about in Chapter 6, “Product Analytics: Growth, Engage-
ment, Retention”).
To give a feel for how the role varies when your customers are busi-
nesses and not consumers, here is another day in the life of a product
manager, in this case from Clement Kao, a product manager at Blend,
which makes software for banks. (He is also the author of Breaking
into Product Management and host of one of the best product manage-
ment communities of practice online, Product Manager HQ).

84 Chapter 5
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AN ENTERPRISE PM
Clement Kao, a product manager at Blend
I wake up around seven. While I’m eating breakfast, I look through Slack
and email, just trying to get a pulse of the things I need to be aware about
today while I take the time to have a nice slow breakfast before it becomes
super hectic. The first 10 minutes of my “workday” are spent checking all
the calendar events that I have, trying to understand what my one priority
is for today.
One of the challenges in B2B is that you don’t get easy access to your
users because you’re gated through the account. Typically, in B2C, you can
recruit users easily for user testing. It’s relatively straightforward to be able
to get people to look at your stuff.
In our business, we need to make sure that we are empowering our account
managers to continue to deepen the relationship rather than have it be super
“thrashy.” So there’s typically some amount of lead time needed to figure
out how we want to position this. When is the right time to bring it up?
For example, in the morning, I might be working with three to four different
account managers—all trying to work through what the objective is of this
ask that we’re making to their customers and users.
One nice thing about having these deeper relationships with these accounts
is that they bring their end-users’ qualitative feedback to you and say,
“There’s a problem. We’re escalating it.” Whereas in B to C, if your user
doesn’t like your product, they leave.
To wrap up the meetings with account managers, it’s really important
to determine who, what, and when. Like, “We agreed you all are writing
emails. When will you send them out? And if they haven’t responded back
by what time frame, when are you going to follow up with them? Let’s make
sure that we’re really clear as to how we are prioritizing this. What are the
next steps?”
Now it’s lunch time. This is during the pandemic, and I want to make sure
that I have time to myself to reset. I’m going to step away from the com-
puter and make lunch with my significant other. Cooking lunch typically
takes 30 to 40 minutes, and then we’ll eat for 15, and then I’ll walk around a
little bit, get back to my desk, and then jump right back in.
For the afternoon, I turn to a different feature that I own, which I am trying
to bring to the finish line.
I think one of the things that we have to keep in mind in B2B is that people
are using not just your feature, but also your entire product to run their
business. There are all of these other features that are floating out there,
so you can’t just optimize for your own retention, engagement, and usage
because if you just optimize for yourself, you’re going to break other
people’s workflows.
Whatever we design and build, when we deliver it to a customer, they don’t
just accept it. It’s not like Facebook messenger. It’s not like Instagram,

The Business of Product Is Business 85
where users might complain, but then they get used to it. There’s no doing
that in B2B because they have all these employees who are trained on all of
these scripts on all of these rollout plans.
As the product manager working directly with a lot of these pilot custom-
ers, my role is to provide more of the lens of not just what the user will say,
but what a customer executive might say when we propose this direction or
scope or change management.
Next, I’m going to sit down with my product operations team to under-
stand how the rollout of a past feature has been working. How do we see
the adoption for different customers? We might draw on data, in terms of
usage, or we might draw on qualitative account management feedback,
like “We are hearing that this account is really struggling with this,” and
basically working with product operations to understand for a feature that
is in flight how we should fine-tune the messaging to make sure that our
customers can adopt it.
Because again, I don’t just ship it and then watch the data flow in. I need to
train all my internal stakeholders first. “This is what this does. This is how
it works. And don’t turn these other things on because they’re currently in
progress. And if you turn them on, then stuff will break.”
So we are in the late afternoon now, and there is some customer report-
ing that there is an urgent thing that is broken. They’re freaking out about
it, and they need someone to take a look. So what I do first is jump in to
understand it.
Do we have enough information from the customer to actually know what
we are supposed to do from an engineering perspective? What is the
breadth of impact? Who is being impacted? If I staff engineers against it
too early, they’re going to say I don’t have enough information.
We spin up a zoom “war room,” and we start working through the triage
together until we figure it out and have a fix. When we know how we’re
going to hot fix it, we’ll figure out the release plan.
This is a long day because there’s a production fire. I need to go loop in
legal compliance, and infosec (information security) on my side, to make
sure that we understand the impacts of the bug and the fix, because some-
times the fix might actually cause even more problems.
Then we assemble our internal communication. While engineering is still
working through how we’re going to release the fix, it’s my job to figure out
how we are going to release the communications.
Once we’ve got the communications out, we’re all good. The fire has died.
At this point, I usually look back on the day before I step away, and ask “Did
I do the thing that I said I wanted to get done today, early in the morning?” If
not, I think about how this affects my initiatives for the rest of this week. Are
there things that I now need to reorder based on what has happened today?
That way, I can understand what my future workflow is going to look like.
My day ends there. I make dinner and spend the rest of the night not look-
ing at Slack.

86 Chapter 5
Key Insights
• Business is not a dirty word.
• Product is responsible for building value both for customers
and for the organization, so that it may sustain itself.
• Product management demands deep understanding of
a target market and a solid strategy for how to capture a
percentage of it.
• For a new product, achieving “product-market fit” is job one
and until you have it, time spent adding features or polish-
ing bugs is wasted.
• Great product managers are obsessed with their customers
(both past, present, and future) and ravenous for any morsel
of insight into them.
• Some product managers are better at launching products and
others are better at bringing out the best in existing products.
• People and program management are a huge part of your
product and get to be even more important as you rise
to leadership.
• Business also means money.
• For some products, your customer is another business.

CHAPTER 6
Product
Analytics:
Growth,
Engagement,
Retention
Living in the Data 88
Funnel Optimization 90
Growth Metrics 95
Growing Your User Base like a Pirate 96
Two Cautions 103
Key Insights 106

88 Chapter 6
O
f all the things that product managers do that UX people tend
not to do, data analysis is perhaps the most alien to the design
world. Even the business aspects of product management that
give some designers the heebie jeebies can still be framed and under-
stood in familiar terms: solving problems, designing solutions that
address competing needs, and so on. It’s also true that many savvy UX
researchers, strategists, and designers do consume data intelligently,
use it wisely to inform their processes, and recognize the value of
combining quantitative insights with qualitative ones.
But . . . almost uniformly, even among the UX practitioners who
embrace data analysis fully as a tool of their trade, there is very little
appetite for spending a majority of their time staring at columns
of numbers, data tables, or analytical models (let alone building,
testing, and deploying analytical models). Very few people got into
design or UX out of a love of number crunching. Not saying it’s not
possible, but it’s vanishingly rare.
It’s no exaggeration to say that product managers may spend a major-
ity of their time analyzing data. There are definitely roles and even
periods of time in most product roles when understanding the data
is almost a full-time job. For a certain kind of geek, this is actually
super fun.
Living in the Data
I call this “living in the data.” You might call it “swimming in the
data”—diving deeply and exploring widely. This daily practice of
immersing yourself in your data leads eventually to something like
a feel for the data, for its grain, its granularity, its cycles, and other
“little ways,” in an almost ambient sense.
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
THE REALITY BEHIND THE DATA
Matt LeMay, co-founder and partner of Sudden Compass, has a
more humanistic way of describing this same sort of immersion: “I
call it ‘living in your user’s reality.’ It’s important to remember that
data is a proxy for other things — I’ve seen a lot of product manag-
ers spend forever on dashboards but never actually learn directly
from their customers.”

Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Retention 89
An obsessed product person will wake up wondering what the daily
metrics look like, will peek at a North Star metric frequently, will
set up alerts to notice when key data points suddenly jump to values
far outside of the usual parameters, will not be satisfied passively
consuming a so-called dashboard, and will instead be engaged
constantly in an interactive practice of interrogating, massaging, piv-
oting, and slicing the data to tease out meaning wherever possible.
Or, at the very least, to tease out some clues, some hints worth
researching qualitatively to go from a curious “what” to a satisfying
explanatory “why” and from that to an actionable “how.”
Get to Love SQL
A common concern for folks getting into software product manage-
ment, especially those with humanities degrees or art skills, is “how
technical do I have to be?” As discussed in Chapter 4, “Wrangling
Engineers,” it depends on the role, but generally it has more to do
with conversancy with technical concepts and constraints than with
being able to craft production-ready code yourself or single-handedly
design the architecture of a technical system.
But one technical skill that all product managers should embrace
is the ability to query databases and manipulate data. If you’re
fortunate, you’ll work with product analytics software that produces
charts and results and even some analyses at the press of a button,
but there are times when there is no substitute for “getting under the
hood” yourself to interact with and sift through the data directly.
You may even want to take a class in MySQL or any other SQL
(Structured Query Language) flavor to learn the basics of command-
line database querying. This knowledge empowers you to ask your
own questions of the data without having to ask an engineer to pull
up a data set or for a data analyst to set up a special view for you in
an app such as Tableau.
Or at Least Airtable . . .
With the onset of tools such as Airtable that make database creation,
import, manipulation, and querying much easier by providing a
complete tabbed spreadsheet-type user interface, you may find you
can get by without typing any SQL code at all into a command-line.
However, even low-code or no-code solutions such as this will only

90 Chapter 6
take you so far, so it empowers you, as a product manager, to be able
to fend for yourself when it comes to data.
Make Instrumentation Part of Every Feature
A common learning cycle for PMs is to ship a product, feature, or fix and
then realize afterward that it needs “instrumentation” (product hooks
added to the code to capture user and system-driven events for analysis),
so you make sure that will be done in the next sprint, but meanwhile
you are flying blind for the first few weeks of your new product.
So then you get serious about instrumentation and add it to your
spec template as an item to address. At this point, you should connect
it back to the goals you are trying to accomplish with this project and
figure out how to measure success. Then you can work with your
developers to include this instrumentation with the feature at launch,
which is a huge victory.
After this, you tend to realize you are still doing this ad hoc with
each new spec and that you need to work with your engineer-
ing peers to define conventions or adopt a system that enables
instrumentation to be applied to any event and to follow naming
conventions defined in a taxonomy somewhere.
Eventually, it becomes second nature that you never build and ship
anything without fully instrumenting it in a way that is consistent
with the rest of your product.
UX SUPERPOWER ALERT
FINDING OUT WHY
With your background in user experience, you are uniquely posi-
tioned to drive conversations from the “what” found in the data
to the “why” that you can only really discover through qualitative
research. If you have fully embraced the need for data, you are
also that much more credible when you explain the need to close
the loop and investigate the signals by talking to people.
Funnel Optimization
One of the most common ways to study data and gain insights into
how to make parts of your product work together is called funnel
optimization. The funnel metaphor is a strange one if you think about
it. It’s primarily visual, rather than logical. The idea is something

Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Retention 91
like this: In most online processes (or really any sort of task a lot
of people attempt), there are a sequence of steps, and it is rare for
everyone who embarks on step one to make it all the way through to
the final step in any process.
In fact, there tends to be a drop-off at every step along the way. This
drop-off varies greatly, of course. Some steps are trivial or so pleas-
ant that 100% of the people who complete the previous step complete
the next one, but as a rough rule of thumb, you’re likely to lose 10%
right off the top every time you add another step to a process.
Why a Funnel?
OK, but why is it called a funnel? Well, imagine it as shown in Fig-
ure 6.1, with a bunch of people starting on the first step of a process
and much fewer making it to the end.
FIGURE 6.1
Imagine a five-step pro-
cess where nine people
complete step 1 and
only two complete the
final step. If you look at
how many people were
lost at each step along
the way (and maybe
also squint a little bit),
you can see why people
started calling this pat-
tern a funnel.
So it got called a funnel because of the superficial visual resemblance
to something wide at the top and narrow at the bottom. Never
mind that a real funnel captures everything at the top and rushes it
through the increasingly narrow hole at the bottom, which is defi-
nitely not what a “funnel” does.
How to Analyze a Funnel
There are several ways to look at a funnel to try to understand what is
going on, why people drop off at various stages, and whether any of
those patterns are changing over time or being affected by other factors.

92 Chapter 6
One of the first things to do is to look for anomalous drop-offs at
particular steps. Figure 6.2 shows the complete sign-up process for an
online therapy service that involves a dialog with a chatbot, getting
matched with a therapist, providing a credit card, and starting a free
three-day trial.
FIGURE 6. 2
You can see that some people drop off at nearly every step in this fun-
nel, but almost all drop off at one particular step.
In this chart, generated with Amplitude, the dark blue bars represent
the percentage of people in a given time period who completed that
step. The lighter blue striped parts show the portion that dropped off
from the previous step.
You can see a bit of a drop-off at the first few steps, with a bigger
drop-off heading into step 4 (just after the chatbot is introduced),
and then a few more steps that carry nearly everyone along (they are
easy-to-complete responses to chat questions).
Then there are a few steps where 1/4 to 1/3 of the people are lost.
These steps bear closer scrutiny to find out what is happening here.
Are the questions more challenging? Is the tone wrong? Is there
something actually difficult or partly broken preventing some people
from completing or understanding the step?
But there is one step that stands out in particular because the funnel
loses nearly everyone at that point. Can you guess what the user is
asked to do at that step? (If you guessed “reach into their wallet and
pull out their credit card,” you’d be right.)

Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Retention 93
Investigating Drop-Off
Now, bear in mind that the moment of truth is always going to show
a larger-than-average drop-off. This is to be expected. Some people
are just window-shopping. Many people do a final gut-check before
committing to anything, let alone something that may cost money
one time or even a recurring subscription.
Who among us has not abandoned an online shopping cart with
something in it we decided at the last minute that we didn’t really
need? In fact, ecommerce shopping cart analysis is basically the
origin of the kind of funnel analysis we are talking about, although it
works equally well with nontransactional processes and tasks.
So, at this stage, it’s time to investigate those steps that have unusu-
ally large drop-offs and come up with some hypotheses about what
is causing the problem and how this cause might be addressed,
mitigated, or worked around.
Can expectations be set better up front to avoid “sticker shock”
when the price is revealed? Would quotations from happy customers
persuade some reluctant free-trial sign-ups to complete the process?
And so on.
Mind you, this is just one of the ways to investigate a funnel and the
most obvious. Other questions to ask might include “Are all these
steps really necessary?” meaning, would more people complete the
process if you streamlined it a bit and removed some steps?
UX SUPERPOWER ALERT
SYSTEMS THINKING
The problem-solving techniques in the design toolkit can come in
real handy when you’re trying to explore ideas for why a funnel
step is underperforming expectations, but be careful at the same
time not to spend your entire focus on the problems that are most
easily solved by design. Look to the whole system, the larger ex-
perience, the options being presented, the transactional consider-
ations if any, and even data about the state of the world during the
time you’re studying, outside of your tiny product experience.
Monitoring Trends over Time
Another way to look at a funnel is from the side, meaning instead
of focusing on the aggregated motion through the funnel in a given

94 Chapter 6
time period, to instead compare results across a time series. You can
do this at the level of any of the steps (What percentage of people
made it from step 3 to step 4 this week and how does that compare to
the percentage who completed step 3 last week?), or across multiple
steps, or even across the entire funnel (Which is the easiest way to
see how a funnel is performing over time at a glance?).
Figure 6.3 shows the conversion rate of a funnel over twelve months.
During this time, a series of experiments tested hypotheses about
ways the funnel could perform better, and you can see gradual
improvement over the course of the year: starting out nearly 1.2% of
the people completed the funnel to approximately 1.7% later, some-
thing like a 40% improvement in the conversion rate.
FIGURE 6.3
This funnel tracked conversion (completion of the final step) over time.
Abbreviated Funnels
For a multistep process, you can often get lost a bit in the weeds, so
another way to look at your longer funnels is to instrument all the
steps but then produce a chart that shows only the “major” steps or
key milestones along the way. This approach can sometimes help
declutter the chart and reveal the sections that need the most work,
as opposed to the specific steps.
All of these ways of looking at the changing funnel data over time
give you hints about where you can find improvement and how you
can optimize the “throughput.”

Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Retention 95
Funnel Caution
As with any form of experimentation, be careful that your focus on
perfecting one particular funnel doesn’t lead you to neglect other
aspects of your product or even entirely different ways of designing
the experience that might look quite different from your current fun-
nel (different sequences, different interfaces or affordances, nonlinear
pathways, and so on).
Optimizing a funnel can be a powerful, almost addictive, experi-
ence so don’t let it blind you to the things going on in your product
that are not as easily quantified or as well represented in the funnel
you’re working on.
Growth Metrics
When working with product analytics, nine times out of ten you are
trying to find some way to make a key number bigger. Getting a data
point to grow is about the most purely quantitative way you can view
product work, and — as you may have encountered already in your
own work — “growth” can be a specialty or even a department of its
own, sometimes part of the product team and sometimes working at
cross-purposes with it.
There are “growth hackers” out there who have made their careers
through quasi-scientific experiments to rapidly or ferociously grow
key metrics. These roles often combine product skills with program-
ming chops. (The “hacker” part can refer either to this hands-on
technical competence or to the larger notion of trying out ideas
aggressively to find new ways to optimize growth that “hacks” the
existing patterns.)
There are also product manager roles that are explicitly “growth
product managers” tasked with this area of responsibility exclu-
sively. But most product managers have a number somewhere they
are assiduously working on to make grow.
The two most common growth targets are active user base and
revenue. Almost always growing the user base comes first (you need
people coming in the door before anyone is going to give you money).

96 Chapter 6
Growing Your User Base like a Pirate
A few years back, an entrepreneur and investor from the eBay mob,
Dave McClure, boiled down growth levers using the piratical mne-
monic, AARRR (see Figure 6.4).
FIGURE 6.4
Dave McClure’s handy mnemonic helps us remember some of the key
levers of growth (in a start-up-oriented context).
As hard-core pirates, some pronounce this as AAARRR, including
one further A at the top of this hierarchy:
• Awareness
• Acquisition
• Activation
• Retention
• Referral
• Revenue

Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Retention 97
You’ll see that some versions of this mnemonic flip the last two items.
Of course, revenue is not always the end goal in every growth effort,
but it usually is for start-ups (the context from which this advice
originated), and it does tend to be literally the bottom line in most
forms of enterprise. (Even nonprofits or government bodies that don’t
typically use money transactionally still have budgets and expenses,
for example.)
This sequence itself can be viewed as a sort of long-scale funnel, and
instrumented as such as well. Each step along the way likely consists of
multiple steps, so it can also be treated as a loose sequence of funnels.
Awareness
Awareness is the first step for any sort of user growth. Before people
try your product, they need to know it exists. They have to have
heard of it. Someone has to tell them about it, or they need to see an
advertisement, or hear a marketing message, or find a link among
their search results.
Awareness is about getting on the radar of your potential custom-
ers, and it overlaps with marketing (it basically is marketing) in the
“product marketing” sweet spot. But, of course, awareness alone is
not enough. Something needs to tip the person from knowing about
your service to trying it.
Acquisition
Acquisition refers to turning a prospect into a user or customers,
“acquiring” them for your user base. (The word feels a bit problem-
atic, but it starts with A so there’s that.)
Acquisition can be defined in various ways. Downloading your app
from the store may count as acquisition. Visiting your website and
interacting with the content may count as acquisition. One unequivo-
cal form of acquisition is sign-up. If someone makes an account on
your service, you may safely consider yourself to have acquired them.
It’s easy to think of this as the key step. New customer acquired—
achievement unlocked! But even a member sign-up is no guarantee
of continued engagement, or that this user will become valuable to
the success of the product, let alone revenue-generating. In order for
that to happen, you need the person sampling your product to use it
actively, to become what we call in the parlance, an active user.

98 Chapter 6
Activation
A user is said to be “activated” or to have become “active” if they
engage with the experience of a product in some meaningful way. A
lot of product analytics software will default to referring to a user as
active if they show up in the data at all. That is, imagine a user who
downloads your app and tries it out on a Monday.
On Tuesday, they are busy and forget about it but something (maybe
a push notification?) reminds them about it on Wednesday, and they
log back in and poke around some more. Then on the weekend, they
come back again on Saturday and Sunday.
This user will appear active on Monday, Wednesday, Saturday, and
Sunday, but not on the other days of this week. They will also be
counted as a weekly active user (one time) for the week these days
appear in (or for two weeks if the time periods are cutting through
the middle of this Monday–Sunday week), and for the month (or
months) these days appear in.
NOTE DAU, WAU, MAU
Product folks tend to talk most about daily and monthly active us-
ers (I recall being pretty excited when a product I led hit a million
monthly active users!), and sometimes weekly as well, all of which
depend on the usage cadences of the product. These concepts get
abbreviated to DAU (daily active users), WAU (weekly), and MAU
(monthly), and one interesting analysis you can do is comparing
them as a ratio, such as DAU/WAU or DAU/MAU (often expressed
in terms of percentages). This can help show whether overall
growth is flat, going up, or going down. So, for example, DAU/
MAU tells you on average how many days of the month a typical
user drops by. A 20% ratio means they were active for about six
days in the month. As a rule of thumb, 40% is generally considered
good, and anything above 50% is considered excellent, but this
will actually vary depending on industry norms.
The problem with defining being active as “showing up” is that this
overstates the case, counting folks who churn or bounce (leave the
product or site again soon after arriving without having engaged in
any meaningful way). So instead, it’s more useful to require that a user
exhibit some behavior. (Typically, you define a basket of events that
qualify as making the user “active,” and then identify all the users in a
given time period who triggered any of the events in that basket.)

Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Retention 99
Another model is to track active users in the loose terms of anyone
who showed up (it can make a nice “vanity metric” to impress
friends and the less perspicacious investors), and to additionally
track a separate metric called something like engaged users where
the bar for counting as engaged instead of merely active is higher
(requiring, for example, that they trigger an event from a smaller and
more rigorous list).
You can then even compare your ratios of engaged users to active
users to see where more lookie-loos can be converted to participants.
Ultimately, the more engaged a person is with your product, the
more likely you are to retain them in your user base.
Retention
Fundamentally, product growth relies on retention. Without robust
retention, you can waste a lot of time, money, and energy building
awareness, acquiring new users, and activating them, only to find
that you’ve lost them in your leaky sieve, like trying to fill up a
bucket with a hole in it.
Retaining a healthy percentage of the users who try your product is
the one sure way to grow in a compounding way, so you will likely
spend more time analyzing retention and looking for the combina-
tion of experiences that correlates best with a satisfied returning
customer or member or client.
One quick way to study how well you are retaining users is by
looking closely at new and returning users in any given time period.
If the raw number of returning users (all users minus new users)
is going up, that’s a pretty good sign. If the percentage of return-
ing users (all users minus new users, divided by all users) is going
up, that’s probably good (but it can also mean that your new-user
acquisition isn’t keeping up).
In the first chart in Figure 6.5, you can see a slight upward trend as
returning monthly users head toward and eventually break 50k. The
second chart shows that over that same time period the percentage
of returning users grew appreciably from around 14% to around 18%
(about a 30% increase).

100 Chapter 6
FIGURE 6.5
Monthly returning users for a product expressed first in absolute terms
and then as a percentage.
The mainstay of retention analysis goes deeper than comparing
raw totals of new and returning users and instead follows specific
users in cohorts to track when and how often they come back after
initially appearing.
Figure 6.6 shows a weekly retention analysis for nearly half a year.
Week 0 is shown at 100%, which means that the people who were
active in that week are the cohort we will be tracking and all of them
were by definition active in that baseline week. Week 1 shows just
upward of 25%, which means that a little over one in four of the
people who came in the benchmark week returned a week later.
FIGURE 6.6
A weekly retention chart.

Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Retention 101
By week 2, we are closer to 20% and week over week fewer return in
a familiar long-tail pattern that flattens out somewhere around 5%
many weeks out. Now, this is not a funnel. There’s nothing prevent-
ing the numbers for week 3 from being higher than those for week
2, for example, but the truth is that this rarely happens. Retention
charts almost always look this way, but the goal is to get them higher.
NOTE RETENTION
Retention can be calculated either in terms of the person returning
on that specific day (which is the strict form) or the person having
returned in any of the days up to and including that day (a looser
calculation). Either analysis can show you interesting patterns.
Any one of the data points on a retention chart like the one in Fig-
ure 6.6 can also be compared to weeks (or days, or months) for other
cohorts. So, for example, you might want to know that the cohort in
Figure 6.6 had 10% retention in week 10. You could then run the same
chart for people whose week 0 is one week later and see how their
week 10 retention compares to 10%. This sort of time series analysis
can also be plotted on a chart.
In Figure 6.7, the chart shows the change in monthly retention of
signed-up members over time for mobile web users.
FIGURE 6.7
Member sign-up reten-
tion data for mobile
web users.

102 Chapter 6
Cohorts don’t have to be strictly based on stretches of time. Cohorts
are any groups of users collected for comparison purposes, so you can
also query your data (depending on what you’re collecting) to find
left-handed users, users over the age of 50, users grouped by their
language preferences, etc., and compare their retention over time to
notice if there are lessons to be learned or advantages to be gained.
Referral
If you’ve reached the point in your growth efforts where you’ve opti-
mized your awareness, acquisition, activation, and retention models,
then driving up referrals is the next lever you can turn to, at least in
some businesses. Remember that this “pirate” mnemonic is geared
toward start-ups and not every model (such as, for example, most B2B
businesses) is positioned to make use of referrals.
Once someone using your software has been activated, engaged, and
retained, they probably like your product! They may even recom-
mend it to friends. If you provide them with a way to do this (such
as a share button), and build in triggers to suggest they recommend
the app at moments when they are most likely to be inclined to do
so, then you can start tracking which of your new users arrived by
following a referral link from one of your existing customers.
Turning enthusiastic supporters into ambassadors or even evange-
lists for your product is the ultimate growth engine.
If you take the fraction of your users who recommend your product
and then look at the percentage of those recommendations that
deliver a new user, you can then calculate what is often called
the coefficient of virality, and what it really measures is how many
new customers you can obtain just on the back of your existing
user base, without any additional marketing or advertising efforts
to supplement.
Anyhow, here’s the usual “virality” equation:
• No. of invitations sent out by each set of customers: i
• Percentage of invites converting into customers: c%
• So then the viral coefficient (K) = i * c%, and K is the number
of customers each existing customer can convert successfully
If K is below 1, then your user base is going to shrink over time
without additional acquisition. If it is 1, then you are at a break-even
point, and so in theory any number above 1 is good and will help

Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Retention 103
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
MAYBE “VIRAL” ISN’T THE BEST METAPHOR?
Now, to be honest, in this day and age I really don’t like the
metaphor of the virus. Let’s work on some healthier terminology,
shall we? One person who has thought about this a lot is Kevin
Marks, who wrote a blog post called “How Not to Be Viral” (over a
decade ago) in which he recommended several potential alternative
metaphors to embrace, all looking to nature but away from disease
models (warning that anything that behaves like a disease is going
to trigger an immune response):
Scattering lots of seeds (r-Strategy, used by many plants and animals)
Nurturing your young (k-Strategy, used by mammals)
Fruiting (“delicious with a seed in it”)
Rhizomatic (“from the roots up”)
Maybe you can come up with some more?
growth, although a K factor of 15 is obviously going to help a lot
more than a factor of 1.02.
A nice thing about the referral model is that it closes the loops, and if
you have a sufficiently high coefficient of spread, then you can start
to get virtuous cycles driving all your growth numbers upward.
Revenue
The final R in the pirate mnemonic is about the money. For start-ups,
it really is all about getting to sustainability, so revenue is frequently
the key growth metric to optimize. Of course, early-stage start-ups
often don’t have any revenue, and in those cases, user growth is
treated as a proxy for eventual potential revenue growth.
See Chapter 8, “Getting the Money,” for more on revenue modeling
and optimization.
Two Cautions
Data gets a bad rap in the UX world sometimes, as it can be associ-
ated with ignoring the humane aspects of a software experience in
the service of making some specific numbers go up. But data analysis

104 Chapter 6
is just a tool in the toolkit alongside contextual inquiry and journey
mapping, to name a few at random. It is neither inherently good nor
evil, and its impact depends entirely on how it is utilized.
Having said that, there are two serious pitfalls to beware when
obsessively trying to optimize important metrics:
• Resist the urge to optimize “dark metrics,” meaning data pow-
ered by human unhappiness, deceit, or manipulation.
• Be very careful when choosing proxy metrics not to mistake the
map for the territory.
These two dangers are of a somewhat different nature, as the first
depends primarily on your values and your vigilance, and the
second has to do more with reading too much into your own data.
Dark metrics are metrics that may benefit the business, particularly
in the short term, but do so at the expense of tricking people (making
it hard to cancel a subscription, let’s say, or scraping their address
book without permission or clear disclosure).
Bad proxy metrics can lead to you optimizing a number for its own
sake, at the expense of the intended goal that the metric was chosen
to represent.
There is a great example of this from the world of medicine. It’s
anecdotal, as I am not a doctor, so don’t take my advice here, but
the idea is this:
• High cholesterol is an indication of increased risk of heart attack.
• Taking statins can reduce one’s cholesterol levels.
• But this reduction in the metric may not be correlated with any
reduction in risk of a heart attack.
That is to say, it is possible to change the metric without improving
the underlying situation that the metric was chosen to represent. So
choose carefully and validate results with other indicators to avoid
missing the forest for the trees.
Lukas Bergstrom, an ex-Google product consultant, made the point
that at least some quantitative data needs to be regularly reality-
checked with qualitative research: “At least I’ve found it helpful to
think of the product metrics and qualitative deep dives as opposite
poles that I need to always be moving between.”

Product Analytics: Growth, Engagement, Retention 105
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A GROWTH-STAGE PM
Janet Brunckhorst, director of product management, Aurora Solar, a
“growth stage” (series B) start-up
Share anything else that might help describe the environment in which you
practice product management.
Mix of R&D, established product, and new product for new segments.
How do you start your workday?
Before work, I write. This isn’t for work per se, but it means I’m thinking
about how teams are structured and how to make them better. I typically
check Slack and email while I’m doing breakfast and getting kids ready so
by the time I’m starting for real, I can focus on some work. If I don’t have a
meeting first thing, that will usually mean following up on questions from
engineering, testing something, or some other tactical work.
How do you spend the early morning?
I’d love to say I spend my most productive hours digging into strategic work,
but usually there’s at least one meeting. If I can, I dive into a deeper topic.
How do you spend most of the morning?
Meetings.
How does the morning end?
Meetings. Twice a week I go to the gym at noon. I block out my lunch.
When do you take a lunch break?
Noon is my lunch break.
What do you do first thing in the afternoon?
Meetings. If I don’t have a meeting, I sit down after lunch to dig into
research or write some definition for upcoming products. Or prep for my
next recruiting interview.
How do you handle “fire drills” or other unplanned work?
First, I try to get a clear sense of the urgency and reasons it’s urgent. If it
really is urgent, I give the relevant team a heads-up via Slack. If it’s clear
enough what needs to be done, we can generally sort that out on Slack and
get started. If not, I will kick off a Slack conversation with the people who
can clarify. Only if that doesn’t work will I call a meeting. Sometimes, this
means pushing back on an initial request to meet.
How do you spend the bulk of the afternoon?
Most days it’s — you guessed it — meetings. Also testing anything that was
completed, responding to requests and questions that came in during the
morning. And hopefully, pushing the deeper work ahead. Some days we use
the afternoon for workshops.
What do you do at the end of the workday?
Wrap up any last questions. Check my calendar for the following day. Shut
down my computer.
Do you work in the evening?
When necessary.

106 Chapter 6
Key Insights
• All great product managers spend time diving deeply into
data and seeking to understand it as thoroughly as possible.
• You should learn to work directly with data to avoid depen-
dence on others and to make data analysis an ordinary part
of your day.
• Instrument (add product analytics to) everything you build,
so that you won’t be “flying blind” when you launch.
• Don’t track everything: focus on key user and system events.
• Optimizing funnels can be a great complement to UX and
other ways to improve an experience so that more people are
able to complete it to their satisfaction.
• Not all product analytics boil down to growth, but many do.
• Growth actually consists of many different elements that
can all contribute to a growing base of users, paying or
otherwise. Among these are awareness, acquisition, activa-
tion (and engagement), retention, referral, and sometimes
revenue (or AAARRR for short).
• Don’t manipulate or harm people using the excuse that the
data made you do it.
• Be careful not to chase the wrong metric off a cliff.

CHAPTER 7
Testing
Hypotheses with
Experiments
Experimentation as a Way of Life 108
Build vs. Fix vs. Tune 109
Defining Hypotheses 109
Proposing and Prioritizing Experiments 111
How to Run an A/B Test 116
Beyond A/B Tests 120
Key Insights 127

108 Chapter 7
R
emember how a product manager needs to be a kind of
scientist? Perhaps a mad scientist at times if you dream big—
but always grounded in evidence, taking care to measure
things accurately.
Scientists learn everything they can about a subject and wonder
about the parts nobody seems to have a clear answer for yet. They
develop hypotheses. This is the creative part! Hypotheses are ideas
about why things are the way they are. Once you’ve got a hypothesis,
you can work on coming up with ways to test it, to prove it true or
disprove it. Whether the hypothesis is right or wrong, a good test
will teach you something about what is going on.
UX SUPERPOWER ALERT
HYPOTHESES ARE JUST IDEAS TO EXPLORE
Generating hypotheses may sound like something you do in an
ivory tower or laboratory, but it’s just a fancy way of coming up
with theories and ideas you can test out. Any design exploration
you’ve ever done has been a way of testing hypotheses. User
research scripts are based on hypotheses you want to explore.
Don’t let the science talk scare you. You’ve got this!
Experimentation as a Way of Life
A lot of product teams segregate experimentation from other
software development activities (build and fix, primarily), either
focusing a small team of engineers on experiments (possibly working
with a growth-focused product manager or even a growth “hacker”)
or rotating experiments in on a cycle, such as every third sprint.
But this can be a reductive way to think about experimentation,
almost always centered on the popular expedient of bucket testing
(also called split testing, A/B testing, and multivariate testing).
The truth is that product management entails an endless series of
“bets” that need to be tested and played out. Some are about launch-
ing something new and others about how to make things better (as
discussed in Chapter 5, “The Business of Product Is Business”), but
they all involve developing working hypotheses of what is going on,
what is hindering progress, what would unlock better outcomes, and
what to focus on next.
It is better to recognize that experimentation is a way of life and is
threaded through all your decisions.

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 109
Build vs. Fix vs. Tune
One broad way to break down what a software development team
can be working on at any given time is to note that the team is either
building something new that does not yet exist, fixing bugs or other
perceived deficiencies in some software that does already exist (but
may or may not yet be released), or fine-tuning software that exists
and has users and the potential to get better.
Experimentation plays a role in all of these phases of development:
• The determination about what to build, for what audiences,
addressing which pain points they have in their current ways of
doing what they do, and figuring out which “job” they will be
willing to “hire” your software to do for them.
• Fixing bugs isn’t particularly experimental, but prioritizing
which bugs to fix (because bugs are kind of fractal-y, and you
can’t really ever fix them all for every scenario on every platform
and device ever) represents a bet or testing of a hypothesis about
what must work seamlessly for your customer and what will be
good enough if it’s good enough.
• Tuning for improved outcomes is almost entirely a matter of
experimentation, and it’s also the context in which most practi-
tioners are highly aware of the experiments they are running.
Defining Hypotheses
A wise man once said “Hypotheses are ideas about why things are
the way they are.” Often, for a product manager, hypotheses are
more specifically attempts to explain the perplexing or unpredictable
results showing up in the data. You learned about product analytics,
metrics, and data analysis in Chapter 6, “Product Analytics.”
Remember that a PM tends to be obsessed with certain key North
Star metrics, frequently going so far as to arrange for a daily morning
email or Slack update, and poring over standing reports and charts
whenever time presents itself.
One reason you might look at the same key North Star metrics every
morning is so that you notice when they go wonky. Why did sales
drop to zero at midnight last night? Why are downloads 4x the usual
number today? Why are you trending on Twitter?

110 Chapter 7
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
PROBING FOR CLARITY AND UNDERSTANDING
When I worked at 7 Cups, our service relied on volunteers trained
to provide active listening to people seeking free emotional sup-
port online. We called these volunteers our Listeners. At one point,
we had a button on our global menu that read “Become a Listener,”
and we felt it could perform better as a recruiting affordance.
A conversational designer on my team, Heather Cornell, suggested
the hypothesis that “New visitors to our website don’t know what
a Listener is, let alone why they should want to become one.” This
seemed pretty compelling, but how could we test it?
Cornell proposed we try a different label for the button, such
as “Volunteer as a Listener” or “Become a Volunteer.” Both of
those alternatives performed better than “Become a Listener”
did, and “Volunteer as a Listener” performed best of all. You can
still see that option in the top menu at 7 Cups last time I checked
(Figure 7.1).
FIGURE 7.1
7 Cups still has “Volunteer as a Listener” in its global navigation.
A hypothesis and experiment led us to the realization that there
were a lot more people out there looking for volunteer opportuni-
ties than looking to take on a specific named role at one particular
volunteer organization, as seen in the global navigation at
7cups.com.
What’s interesting is that a modest hypothesis (that people didn’t
know what we meant by “Listener”) led to a significant improve-
ment, and the subsequent experimentation revealed a further
insight (there are people out there specifically looking for opportu-
nities to volunteer).

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 111
As you try to answer those questions, the ideas that suggest them-
selves to you as explanations are your hypotheses, but, of course, not
all guesses are created equal, so it behooves you to make your hypoth-
eses crisp and testable, and to have colleagues whom you can discuss
or sketch these ideas with and who can be your “thought partners” in
refining them, riffing on them, or nailing down the implications.
Because once you have a hypothesis you like, you’ll need to come up
with one or more experiments you can do to test the hypothesis.
Proposing and Prioritizing Experiments
As you break down the product you work on into components or
functional areas, you’ll find it’s quite possible to generate many
hypotheses about each piece of functionality or flow in each area.
Ideas are a dime a dozen, and the product manager’s job is to provide
focus by facilitating prioritization.
For any given hypothesis that you have deemed tackles a serious
enough high priority goal, the next job is to come up with experi-
ments to test this hypothesis. Part of this is a matter of logic. If your
hypothesis is that there are too many ads on the inbox screen of your
mail app, and that this is leading your users to ignore all the ads, an
experiment to test this hypothesis might be to reduce the number of
ads displayed. If the hypothesis is correct, this should lead to more
ad engagement. If not, then there are likely to be other factors at play.
But not all hypotheses are so straightforward as to suggest obvious
experiments, and a failed experiment does not necessarily disprove
your hypothesis. (It might also be that the experiment failed to test
the hypothesis effectively.) So there can also be an element of art or
creativity in coming up with experiments that efficiently and ele-
gantly zero in on the “hinge” of the hypothesis to reveal the impact
of making the change.
Table 7.1 shows a set of hypotheses paired with experiments that
might help prove them one way or another.

112 Chapter 7
TABLE 7.1 A SET OF HYPOTHESES AND SOME EXPERIMENTS TO
TEST THEM
Hypothesis Experiment
People are reluctant to sign up for a
service before they know its value.
Provide a way for new users to try the
service before signing up.
The “Become a Member” call to action
on the primary button sounds like a
big commitment.
Change the primary button’s call to
action to “Get Started.”
Data show that 40% of in-app
messages go unanswered because
logged-out users are unaware of
pending messages.
Add a step during sign-up asking the
user to turn on push notifications and
explaining that this will ensure that
they don’t miss critical messages.
Without knowing who is behind this
service, people are reluctant to trust
you with their sensitive data.
Show your team, their academic
credentials, and the awards won for
building robust privacy-preserving
systems on the home page.
Also, hypotheses and experiments are not always one-to-one. You
can, and often should, come up with multiple ideas for experiments
to test a hypothesis. This may be because you are searching for the
angle that most effectively tests and reveals the potential of the idea,
and it can also occur when you run a successful experiment and
want to go back to the same well to see whether a follow-up experi-
ment will yield further benefits on top of the optimization or success
already achieved.
Table 7.2 shows multiple experiments generated as possible ways to
test the original hypotheses.
So after you do this for a while, you’re going to have a big pile of
hypotheses and an even bigger pile of proposed experiments to test
these hypotheses, which brings us back to prioritization.
One thing you learn quickly is that you can’t test everything. You
can’t research everything. You can’t answer every question or worry
you have, and you can’t eliminate risk. But reducing risk (or de-risking
in the jargon) is one of the primary goals of experimentation, which
means that what ultimately should determine which experiments
you run and which ones you put off comes down to identifying the
riskiest bets you are considering and doing what you can to mitigate
those risk in particular.

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 113
TABLE 7. 2 TWO OR MORE EXPERIMENTS FOR EACH HYPOTHESIS
Hypothesis Experiment
People are reluctant to sign up
for a service before they know
its value.
• Provide a way for new users to try the
service before signing up.
• Add a video to the home page
demonstrating how easy and rewarding
the experience is.
• Show real customers and real
quotations endorsing the service.
• Include the logos of all the well-known
businesses already using the service, as
“social proof” of its value.
The “Become a Member” call
to action on the primary button
sounds like a big commitment.
• Change the primary button’s call to
action to “Get Started.”
• Change the primary button’s call to
action to “Give It a Try.”
• Change the primary button’s call to
action to “Get in There!”
About 40% of in-app messages
go unanswered because logged-
out users are unaware of pending
messages.
• Add a step during sign-up asking the
user to turn on push notifications and
explaining that this will ensure that they
don’t miss critical messages.
• Send users email reminders when they
have unanswered messages.
Without knowing who is behind
this service, people are reluctant
to trust the company with their
sensitive data.
• Show your team, their academic
credentials, and the awards won for
building robust privacy-preserving
systems on the home page.
• Publish a white paper about data
security to establish bona fides and
credibility.
• Emphasize the use of data encryption
both “in transit” and “at rest” in
describing the service.
For example, tweaking the color of a button to try to catch more eyes
may be something you can just go ahead and try without testing
anything first, because the existing risk of maybe not having the
ideal button color is not huge and the downside risk of being wrong
is probably also not game-changing.
But now imagine that you have several important goals in tension
(which you always do, by the way). Let’s say you need to increase
growth by juicing sign-ups and improving retention around free
services, but you also have a significant revenue stream from impulse
buyers that you need to maintain and ideally grow as well. In this

114 Chapter 7
scenario, it might be easy to make the option of signing up and
engaging in the free services much more attractive and prominent
than the impulse-buy call to action, but the risk of doing so is tank-
ing a critical revenue stream. In that case, rushing ahead to make the
change feels too risky, and an experiment on a small subset of your
traffic can be a good way to study the trade-off before betting next
quarter’s payroll on a longer-term growth ideal.
One other factor that complicates your prioritizations of experiments
is that running more than one experiment at the same time in the
same area or flow of your product leads to muddy, hard-to-interpret
results. So as long as you are running experiments that don’t conflict,
you can have several in flight at the same time, up to your ability to
keep track and cope.
NOTE LEARNING FROM NETFLIX
To dig deeper in how to conduct A/B testing at scale, check out
“It’s All A/Bout Testing: The Netflix Experimentation Platform,” a
post on Netflix’s tech blog.
You’ll want to both maintain your backlog of hypotheses and pro-
posed experiments and constantly be prioritizing the upcoming tests
and tracking the tests you have under way. A completed experiment,
whether scored as a win or a loss, should generate some insight into
the validity of the hypothesis (or, at least, the efficacy of the experi-
ment). These insights — stacked up over time — belong with the rest of
your research findings, likely in a repository or tracking tool shared
with UX and data teams.
Whichever tool you use (I like to use an Airtable template, as shown
in Figure 7.2), you’ll want to develop an agreed-upon rubric for
ranking potential experiments and choosing which to prioritize for
upcoming sprints. Factors to consider include the following:
• The potential reach of the experiment (how much traffic flows
through the area of the test).
• The potential impact of a successful experiment (somewhat
subjective, but are you shooting for a 10% improvement in the
metric being tracked? 50% 2x? 5x?).
• The engineering and other staff effort required to complete
the experiment.
• How confident you feel and what evidence you have to support
the hypothesis.

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 115
Figure 7.2 shows an Airtable template used to prioritize, track, and
score experiments. The template was initially provided to me by
product and growth expert Jesse Avshalomov, and it was tweaked
over time for various projects and clients. (Airtable is a relational
database tool with a fluid user experience, which some product man-
agers find extremely flexible and useful in corralling and tracking
complex moving systems.)
Airtable helps you score experiments in terms of potential impact,
effort, confidence in the hypothesis and a few other factors. (You can
overrule the score when deciding what to do next, but it helps a lot
with the broader strokes of prioritization.)
FIGURE 7. 2
A glimpse at the experiment pipeline keeping track of hundreds of experiments
before, during, and after.

116 Chapter 7
How to Run an A/B Test
You may recall that not all experiments take the form of A/B tests,
but it remains a potent tool in your kit, and while the general format
of this kind of testing doesn’t change much, the specifics of how such
tests are managed and implemented varies from shop to shop. Some
teams use third-party JavaScript-based tools such as Optimizely,
while others use tools built into analytics packages such as Google
Analytics, Amplitude, Mixpanel, Applytics, and so on. Still others
hand-roll their own tests directly in code (which can lead to problems
later if not cleaned up properly).
Factors to consider when running bucket tests (also known as split
test, bucket test, multivariate test, A/B test) include the following:
• Scheduling
• Statistical Significance
• Impact
• Learning
• Stacking
Scheduling
As with any development work, including building and fixing,
running prioritized tests has to be weighed against other items in
the backlog and then prioritized into sprints. Tests can in many
circumstances run longer than a single sprint, so starting the test,
overseeing the test to make sure it is running properly and no bugs
have shown themselves, and then ending the test are all distinct
tasks that you need to track individually.
The reason that tests take varying lengths of time to resolve them-
selves is that they don’t yield meaningful results until they have
included a statistically significant number of subjects. Depending
on the traffic flow through the area where you are testing, getting
enough people in “each” bucket can take anything from a day to
many weeks.

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 117
Statistical Significance
So how do you know when you have achieved statistical significance?
There are mathematical models to help determine this, and software
tools that facilitate A/B testing (such as Amplitude) now include
measurements of statistical significance, as well as the likelihood
that the result is correct. Note that as a very broad rule of thumb, you
tend to need at least 2,000 people in each “bucket” before you can
trust a result.
One way to test this result, which can be very interesting, is to run
an A/A test. Basically, you set up an A/B test and put new users into
one bucket or the other, but you serve up exactly the same experience
to people in each bucket. What you’ll see early on as the data starts
rolling in is that B performs much better than A, or the other way
around—no, wait—now it’s changed again! Just as you might flip a
coin four or five times in a row and get heads every time, if you flip
it enough times, the number of heads and tails results will end up
nearly equal (unless you are in a Tom Stoppard play).
Keep an eye on your test and note when the results approach parity
and stay pretty even from that point on, and don’t be surprised if
this stabilization takes place when there are about 2,000 people in
each group.
It’s extremely important to determine when you will end the test
before you start it. Otherwise, the temptation is to “cherry pick”
by ending the test when the result you are rooting for is ahead.
Similarly, you need to end the test when it has reached significance,
instead of “just letting it run a little longer” in hopes that your under-
dog will still pull it out in overtime.
Impact
After you’ve ended the test, you have a measurement of its impact.
Did more people in the varied bucket do the thing you wanted them
to do? Was it a wash? Or did it actually depress the results? Any
outcome is fresh information and welcome, but of course winning is
better! Either way, you need to track and record these results.
One of the biggest dangers of A/B testing is “polishing a local maxi-
mum,” which means optimizing something to the utmost degree
without realizing that there are much more valuable possibilities out
there (Figure 7.3).

118 Chapter 7
FIGURE 7.3
Polishing a local
maximum can lead to
ignoring much greater
opportunities.
Learning
In addition to tracking the numerical impact on goal metrics achieved
by each AB test, you also need to make a qualitative assessment of the
meaning of the results. Did they validate the test, partially or in full?
Did they reveal a flaw in the hypothesis (or the test itself)? Do they
suggest further hypotheses or additional tests to try?
This is part of your product’s intelligence arsenal and building that
up over time is even more important than “winning” the current
tests you’re running.
Stacking
It’s true that you even learn things from tests that fail to prove the
results you were shooting for. Actually, some people will argue
that you tend to learn more from failures than you do from suc-
cesses (although I believe this only holds true if you take success for
granted and refuse to examine and reflect on it as thoroughly as you
do your failures).
However, winning is better!

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 119
And once you have a win, you can end your test and “lock it in.”
Now instead of just one-half of your users, or one-half of ten percent
of your new users, getting the benefit of the improvement found by
the test, everybody can get in on it.
Then it’s time to see if you can stack some more wins on top of that
first one. Was the test as aggressive as possible or did you hedge your
bets to avoid disrupting other metrics? Can a further test take things
up another notch? If there isn’t any easy variation on the successful
test to try, what about the other experiments that came afterward in
the prioritization stack-rank? Try one of them! In some cases, you can
return to the same well multiple times and turn a 20% increase into a
100% increase, or a 5x improvement into a 10x improvement.
The losses teach you something, but those locked-in wins can stay
with you forever.
Problems with A/B Tests
A/B tests are the shiny thing that product folks gravitate toward.
They seem easy to explain and understand, but they can be mislead-
ing and fill you with a false sense of confidence.
Beyond the risk you’ve already seen of polishing a local maximum,
there are several other major pitfalls with relying on this type of
testing to make decisions.
Most of them boil down to two major themes:
• There is no way to know for sure if externalities have affected
your test and if running the test again at another time under
other circumstances would get the same result.
• At best, you know what is happening, but an A/B test cannot by
itself tell you why.
The first set of problems relates to overinterpretation. In some ways,
a statistically significant test can disguise the guesswork surround-
ing it. (At least when you have mere “directional” signals, you are
forced to be skeptical, to verify patterns, and to investigate potential
reasons for the behavior you’re seeing.)
The second set of problems involve projecting subjective qualita-
tive interpretations of the data without validating them. As with so
many other metrical signals you might have available to you, such as

120 Chapter 7
customer satisfaction or net promoter scores, user feedback, ratings
and reviews, complaint volume to customer support, etc., the real
job is to do your research, interview users, and get deeper into why
things are happening the way they are and not just what is going on.
Beyond A/B Tests
Product managers have a bad habit of equating all experimentation with
A/B tests (just as some reduce all user experience research to usability
testing). Remember that experimentation is woven throughout product
work at every level. So, more specifically, what are some other forms of
experimentation to consider beyond the ever-popular bucket test?
• Variations on A/B tests
• Concierge
• Wizard of Oz
• Pretotypes
• Smokescreen
• Fake door
• Broken glass (aka Hard test)
• Dogfooding
• Partial rollouts
• Beta programs
• Holdover (aka Holdback)
• Sales experiments
• Process experiments
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
WHY YOU OFTEN CAN’T RUN A/B TESTS IN
ENTERPRISE CONTEXTS
Another issue with A/B tests is that they are not always possible
outside of mass-market direct-to-consumer products. As Clement
Kao explained when sharing a day in the life of a B2B product
manager, not only is the user base of many business products too
small to generate statistically significant traffic, but the customers
are not anonymous data points but rather specific businesses and
people involved in high-touch customer success relationships.
“Experimenting” on these customers by showing half of them one
interface and half another is a disruptive nonstarter.
Kao said, “In B2B, you can’t actually A/B test because someone is
trying to use your product to run their business. So if they have to
train one cohort of users to use one workflow and another cohort to
use a different workflow, you definitely cannot do that. Similarly,
it’s not helpful to recruit a random ‘enterprise user’ when you’re
trying to go after a specific set of customer accounts.”

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 121
You can find a nice scheme for organizing these methods in Itamar
Gilad’s Testing Product Ideas Handbook (requires free newsletter sign-
up to access) in Figure 7.4. His diagram distinguishes “experiments”
from other forms of idea validation, but most of the methods in his
Tests stacks are experiments in the sense meant in this chapter.
FIGURE 7.4
A good visualization of many forms of experimentation, testing, and
validation.
Variations on A/B Tests
Because A/B tests have their limitations, if you’re going to use them,
you should know the range of related experiments, such as A/B/C
tests and multivariate testing. In an A/B test, typically A is the
control (the existing experience) and B is the variant tested against it.
In an A/B/C test, you split the traffic into three equal-sized buckets
and compare the control against two different variations.
A multivariate test is even more complicated. In this scenario, you are
trying to test several things at once. To use a trivial example, consider
button color, shape, and text. A multivariate test then splits users into
sets of buckets. So some users may get the red button with rounded

122 Chapter 7
corners that says “Get in there!” and others will get the green button
also with rounded corners that says “Start today,” and so on. Statisti-
cally, this requires even greater traffic to have each of the subtabs
(combinations of all possibilities) receive significant numbers, and
the interpretation of the results is likely challenging and tricky.
Teams running a lot of A/B tests in flight are often really running
disorganized multivariate tests without being aware of it.
Concierge
A concierge experiment is one in which the service provided is not
being handled by a software algorithm, but actually by a human
being behind the scenes (sometimes an intern).
NOTE TWO SENSES OF THE WORD “CONCIERGE”
Concierge is not to be confused with “concierge features,” such
as a chatbot that helps you find and trigger options in a product.
The role of the person can be explicit or disguised but the point of a
concierge test is to learn what customers value and what processes,
workflow, language, and other choices work best. Once this is deter-
mined, you can get some code written to take the humans out of the
service delivery workflow, which will enable the feature to scale up
to handle far more people than a manual process could.
If you’re up front about it being a human-driven service, as Tom
Kerwin puts it, “You get a ludicrous amount of real-world data and
experience from having the conversations and solving the problems
in real time.”
By the way, a related concept that is likely on its way out as ter-
minology is Mechanical Turk (not to be confused with Amazon’s
crowdsourced gig work service), based on an 18th century chess-
playing hoax in which an apparent mechanism is disguised as a
human operator.
Wizard of Oz
Wizard of Oz testing is just about the same as concierge testing, but
it involves providing a convincing user interface and hiding the fact
that the back end is just a person typing and performing tasks for
the end user.

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 123
A start-up called Aardvark used this approach to validate its “social
search” value proposition, using cheap labor to experiment with
robot response strings and to do the manual work of tracking down
people in the network who might be able to answer a question. The
intern would pose as a bot while texting with both the person doing
the search and the person identified who might be able to provide an
answer. (They sold the company to Google in under two years.)
Amazon reportedly also used this approach to initially develop their
“people also liked” recommendations. They were manual at first, to
prove they generated enough income and interest to be worth invest-
ing a ton of data and algorithmic development. Zappos launched its
entire business this way.
Pretotypes
Coined by Alberto Savoia (as you can see in his talk “Build the Right
It”
1
), a pretotype is a “fast, low-fidelity version of your concept — be it a
product, service, or business — that is just complete enough for you to
generate real, data-driven validation. Whereas prototypes answer the
question “can we build it,” a pretotype addresses “should we build it.”
Smokescreen
Not to be confused with “smoke testing” (which means a basic set
of functional tests run to make sure that nothing is broken, from the
idea of firing up a machine and seeing if it starts giving off smoke), a
smokescreen is a promotion for a product that does not yet exist, in
order to determine the level of demand.
1 www.youtube.com/watch?v=3sUozPcH4fY
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
THE MAN BEHIND THE CURTAIN
Tom Kerwin: “I had an amazing experience last summer doing
a Wizard of Oz MVP with a small team. In just eight days, we
formed the team, delivered some value, and had actual custom-
ers. Then we iterated weekly. The first send took the whole team
three days to hand-crank. Each week, the engineers fixed the most
frustrating part, and after about eight weeks, we had the whole
process down to 15 minutes.”

124 Chapter 7
You may recall the story of how Jay Zaveri proved there was a pent-
up demand for “Word on the iPad” by running ads claiming to have
the solution ready. The sign-ups generated by this ad were the result
of a successful smokescreen test.
Fake Door
A fake door is analogous to a smokescreen, but rather than being a
landing page or sign-up form, it is presented as a real feature in the
product’s interface. When a customer tries to use the feature, they are
instead presented with a promotion for the upcoming feature and
sometimes a way to register interest (such as asking to be notified
when it’s ready). The traffic to this phantom feature is one way to
gauge interest.
The risk in this kind of test is that you might frustrate your users.
Broken Glass
Much like an intentional version of the product-market fit assess-
ment, a Broken Glass or Hard test involves offering a feature but
deliberately making it difficult to access or use. This is a way of
determining if the demand for the feature is strong enough to invest
in developing it further.
Dogfooding
Dogfooding, or “eating our own dogfood,” means testing a feature
in house on your own employees before rolling it out to customers.
Google famously did this with a great deal of success for Gmail and
with a great deal of failure for Google Plus. Your employees are not
always the best proxies for your customers, but one real advantage of
dogfooding is that it makes it much harder to ignore usability issues
and other frustrations when they are hampering your own ability
to get work done.
Partial Rollouts
When planning a significant change to an existing product with a
substantial user base, a partial rollout allows you to gauge acceptance
and adoption and to troubleshoot issues that may not have been
presented in research, design, or usability testing.

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 125
A common approach is to roll out a new feature first to just 10% of
the user base and monitor the response closely. If a problem occurs,
roll it back and fix it. If all seems well, then roll the feature out to 20%
of your users and repeat. At some point, you may feel comfortable
jumping straight to 50% of users and then eventually to all of them.
Beta Programs
A beta program is another way to offer speculative and new features
to a core dedicated user group that is willing to test things for you
that are not fully baked. Once features are validated, they can be
rolled out to non-beta users, and beta users can start playing with
even newer feature ideas.
Holdover
A Holdover or Holdback test involves transitioning the product to
your new feature or change, but keeping it the old way for a small
group of users to keep track of the effects of change over time. As
Ryan Rumsey, founder of Second Wave Dive, put it, “The holdover
is a nice way to look at performance over time. I think many teams
assume an initial test result = same results over time. I’ve found
many features were used initially because they were new, but then
dropped back after 90 days.”
Sales Experiments
Outside of the product’s feature set and user experience, you can
apply experiments to other aspects of the value chain, such as sales
or marketing. One example of such an experiment is called a pitch
provocation, which involves trying out one or more provocative
pitches to determine which best makes the case for your solution.
A pitch provocation takes the form “You’ve got a big problem, and
we can help.”
Tom Kerwin said, “It’s a way to help tease apart your understand-
ing of possible value propositions and problems. We create several
extreme-and-likely-wrong versions of each, and then get prospects/
participants to react: to tell us what they think these mean, etc. From
that, we can triangulate a better sense of the space.”

126 Chapter 7
Process Experiments
Remember that being agile means constantly evaluating how your
team is working and looking for ways to improve it. Beyond pas-
sively noting process problems and then looking for solutions, you
may also consider experimenting with variations in your processes
to determine what works best.
As Ryan Rumsey said, you can ask yourself questions such as “What
happens with decision-making or velocity when we change our
storytelling structure?” and then experiment with those changes to
see what impact they have.
If you’re ready to embrace experimentation as a way of life, get ready
to look at everything through that lens.
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A START-UP PM
Nicholas Duran, senior product manager at Suvaun, a healthcare
benefits upstart
How mature (or how long established) is the organization you work for?
Four years old with start-up mindset
Share anything else that might help describe the environment in which you
practice product management.
We are a young company, recently acquired, that is growing a technology
platform for a multibillion dollar industry and a captive audience that is
largely resistant to change.
How do you spend the early morning?
Typically, I review/update/organize the to-do list for the day and week.
I hit urgent items first and then move on to meetings, planning updates,
and documentation.
How do you start your workday?
In the a.m., it’s the family routine, coffee, more coffee (maybe a quick peek
at online news and feeds for noteworthy industry updates), a quick system
check for any new tasks, calendar invites, or monitoring alarms. Then a
healthy morning stand-up meeting with the team. After that, it is off to
the races.
How do you spend most of the morning?
Clearing road blocks and doing correspondence.
How does the morning end?
The ongoing routine and clock blur into a state of hunger. Then a decision
is made whether there is time or not to proceed on to lunch.

Testing Hypotheses with Experiments 127
When do you take a lunch break?
Mid-day is a typical lunch range — anywhere between 11 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.
Maybe a 10–15 min step outside for some sun on the face.
What do you do first in the afternoon?
Check email and recover from lunch.
How do you handle “fire drills” or other unplanned work?
Carefully! I check priorities, assess risk, and schedule accordingly. It depends
on how severe the issue is.
How do you spend the bulk of the afternoon?
I spend it in meetings, use cases and operational excellence improvements.
What do you do at the end of the workday?
Refill my coffee, update my notes for the next day, check feeds and updates
online, check LinkedIn, and thank the team for another great day.
Do you work in the evening?
When necessary.
Key Insights
• Experimentation is a way of life for product managers.
• Building, fixing, and optimizing are all aspects of develop-
ment you can experiment with.
• Develop testable hypotheses about how to improve results
and fix problems.
• For each hypothesis, generate as many ideas for experiments
as you can.
• Prioritize both hypotheses and experiments rigorously.
• Use experimentation to “de-risk” your riskiest bets.
• Don’t reduce all experimentation to A/B tests.
• Make sure that your test results are statistically significant.
• Be careful not to focus on relatively trivial improvements.
• Stack up your wins!
• Experiment widely, not just with feature variations.



CHAPTER 8
Getting the
Money
Profit and Loss 130
Revenue Models 131
Breaking Even 133
Revenue Lifecycles 145
What’s Money Without Customers or Transactions? 147
Key Insights 148

130 Chapter 8
W
hile it’s not true that all designers get uncomfortable when
the talk turns to money (budget constraints, the need for
revenue, potentially seeing people as paying customers
above all else), it’s fair to say that many UX designers are happy to
have someone else (a “bean counter,” a “suit”) obsess about grubby
stuff like money and find their comfort zone far away from the bazaar
and the cash register. Designing shopping carts, check-out flows, and
credit card forms is about as close as most people get and that’s plenty
close enough, as these tasks rarely inspire flights of creativity.
However, my take on this issue is not everyone’s. B. Pagels-Minor
pushed back on this broad brush, saying, “I generally disagree with
this. Many UX designers I work with are just as savvy and thought-
ful about how to monetize as many product managers.”
It’s probably true, and I may be betraying my own narrow experience
and some lingering stereotypes that need updating. So, really you
can answer for yourself whether you cringe when money is taken
into account as a factor in UX design and product development.
Regardless, money is the life blood of our economy, no matter
what sector of the economy you work or play in. Of course, there
are huge swaths of human endeavor that are not transactional or
commercial, but even government, nonprofits, and other types of
organizations need resources, spend money, and have to stay afloat
somehow financially.
As a product manager or frankly even a product designer, it pays
to keep an eye on the money. Design teams are often viewed as cost
centers. UX has spent more than a decade arguing that it provides
sufficient return on investment (ROI) to justify the research, the mod-
eling, the iteration, the prototyping, and the testing. There’s always
been an undertow of costs vs. benefits pulling UX along with it. From
a product perspective, you’re just including this financial dimension
in your larger model of what’s going on, what you’re making, and
how you’re going to succeed.
Profit and Loss
In a business’s C-suite, financial tracking, modeling, and projection
are constant. Profit and loss (P&L) responsibilities tend to roll up to
division heads and general managers. Heads of product may have
P&L responsibilities, but most product managers do not. They don’t
tend to have decision-making power over hiring budgets or resource

Getting the Money 131
allocation, outside of their own product (at best). A PM rarely con-
trols the P&L situation, but it sure can control you, and you need to
be aware of it.
Depending on the context and the product’s lifecycle, you may
be doing business modeling, working out the cost of goods sold,
defining revenue targets, and identifying suitable pricing levels.
That context might be business, and if so, is it consumer or enter-
prise? And if not, who is paying for the service, and where do those
resources come from and what else might compete for them?
Where the product stands in its lifecycle will drive different financial
expectations. Typically, there is a period of R&D and investment
launching a product where it generates costs with no revenue or
income at all. Later, it will be time to figure out how to get the service
paid for without necessarily having to achieve total independence of
funding from revenue alone (“break even”).
Beyond that a successful product would be expected to more than
pay its own way in terms of revenue generated vs. cost to produce
and deliver. Some products have long periods of plateauing and
maintenance where revenue is steady and optimized but no longer
particularly growing or likely to peak again. Finally, at the end of
a product’s life, when it no longer makes ends meet financially and
has no viable future, a PM needs to work out the legal obligations
to legacy customers, communicate plans to take it off the market,
and ultimately wind things down while minimizing the remaining
liabilities on the books.
Revenue Models
Not all products come with price tags directly attached. If you make
enterprise software in a B2B context, the customer may have paid for
multiple subscriptions to an entire suite of software, and the product
you’re working on may come as part of that package, whether an
individual user ever tries it out or not. This is where SaaS (software
as a service) products come into the picture. Now you’re offering
entire enterprises your software as a hosted turnkey service, at scale,
and charging per seat.
SaaS products charge their users much the same as a streaming
entertainment service charges you a single monthly subscription
fee rather than asking you to pay for each show you watch. It still
costs money to make those shows, and you can be sure that Netflix

132 Chapter 8
and Amazon Prime pay very close attention to which shows do get
watched (and for how long) and how well that correlates with view-
ers deciding to continue their subscriptions, and so on.
So even if there isn’t a point-of-sale transaction, the individual prod-
uct still bears a measurable relationship to the business model, and
its product manager needs to account for that aspect when defining
success metrics. (Once these metrics are defined, the growth practices
covered in Chapter 6, “Product Analytics : Growth, Engagement,
Retention,” come into play to try to optimize those metrics.)
For a thorough dive into possible revenue models for products, you
may need to go back to business school, but some of the most com-
mon ways to bring revenue in for a product include the following:
• Free during a beta period, and then paid for all.
• Free during a trial period, and then paid if not canceled.
• Free during a trial period, and then a paid recurring subscription
if not canceled.
• Paid subscription (no trial period).
• Free product with in-app purchases available.
• Free product with offer to upgrade to paid Pro version of product.
• “Freemium” paywall to unlock higher level(s) of service.
• Enterprise licenses paid by seat.
• Enterprise licenses paid by usage.
What works best for your product will depend on the needs, drives,
and constraints of your potential customers.
NOTE CUSTOMERS ARE DIFFERENT FROM USERS
A customer is a person who pays for a service. A user is a person
who uses a service. A user may or may not be a customer, and
vice versa.
Your revenue model is another area of potential experimentation, but
it can also mean betting your business and your livelihood on your
decisions, so this means treading carefully and doing your research
up front, as well as studying the data and other signals intently and
being prepared to drop a bad model and pivot rather than remaining
overly attached to your favorite ideas.

Getting the Money 133
Even when you have found the right model, you’ll want to tune it to
find the best price points, the right things to put behind the paywall,
the optimal subscription rate, and so on.
Breaking Even
Getting a product (or a business) to the break-even point is a tremen-
dous accomplishment. Until you manage that, it’s hard to call the
effort a success.
Of course, nothing lasts forever. Some tremendously influential and
valuable products came and went without ever making a profit, let
alone breaking even. Still, if money is the lifeblood of the material
world, then getting to the point where you take in more than you lose
is, in the long run, just the ante required to play the game at all. What
you do next is the real challenge.
For four years, I headed up the product team at 7 Cups, a start-up
that had graduated from the YCombinator incubator program,
which instills a ruthless honesty about growth metrics and facing
up to when they are not growing. At its core, 7 Cups offered a way
for anyone on the planet to get emotional support from a stranger
anonymously, privately, and securely over the internet, in the form of
a text chat. There was more to it than that, but the basic value propo-
sition was peer-based support for free on demand.
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
POSTPONING REVENUE IN A LOSS-LEADER STRATEGY
TO OWN A MARKET
As a counterpoint to this framing, Netflix product manager B. Pagels-
Minor suggested I may be oversimplifying things a bit here, saying “I
disagree. Amazon was not profitable for years. Neither was Netflix, and it
was well understood that that was the plan. I think saying break even as
the success metric is pretty illogical in modern tech companies. It’s more
likely that the goal would be to get market penetration.”
This is a really good point! There are, of course, more examples of
companies that won on market capture long before they found a way to
capitalize on it. A few dominant products in terms of market share still
have not! So, take this as a case study in one particular path and try to see
how the same thinking and doing could crack other success goals aside
from that of “breaking even.”

134 Chapter 8
When I came aboard as VP Product, I could see that 7 Cups already
had product-market fit. The user interface was frankly somewhat ho-
hum, having already evolved through a series of feature hacks and
design tweaks post initial launch. The value proposition wasn’t fully
clear, and the first-time experience and navigation were something
of a maze.
And yet people were “crawling through glass” to seek support (and
increasingly to offer it) in growing numbers. Clearly, 7 Cups had
tapped into a deep-seated need for authentic caring and connection
among people (see Figure 8.1).
FIGURE 8.1
Game of Thrones star Maisie Williams experienced online bullying after achiev-
ing stardom as a young actor, and shared in a BBC anti-bullying campaign how
she had found anonymous support at 7 Cups.
Making sure that it remained free was also a core part of the mission,
and although growth kept increasing, the rate of increase was slow-
ing, which isn’t what venture capitalists love to see. (They also really
like their pigeonholes, so if they can’t decide if you are a behavioral
health start-up, a digital therapeutics play, or a social network, they
tend to throw up their hands.)

Getting the Money 135
We kept working on growth hacking, of course, but in the meantime
finding a VC “sugar daddy” to provide millions of dollars for us to
experiment with to find how to keep a business afloat offering free
services powered by volunteers was looking increasingly unlikely.
Our early-stage investors were becoming a bit anxious, too, and
they suggested strongly that we start looking into ways to generate
revenue. So we began a series of experiments, as follows:
Experiment #1: Donations
The first idea my boss, the CEO had, was to ask for donations, or as
I called it, “the begging bowl strategy.” The reasoning was that we
were providing a public good, somewhat like public broadcasting,
and that we could ask people to donate to support our mission.
I was of two minds about this.
• We were never going to make enough money to stay afloat just
from donations.
• There was nothing wrong with enabling people to give us money.
So we agreed to try it, despite my skepticism about the willingness
of ordinary folk to donate to a private business that is not a nonprofit.
(This is called “disagree and commit” and is a big part of product
leadership.)
We debated whether to enable one-time donations or to require that
they be recurring (meaning someone would have to cancel before a
month passed if they really wanted to give just once), and we experi-
mented with how to present the option in our user interface, as well
as with persuasion or even what you might call social engineering.
We created something called the “compassion jar” and asked folks to
help “fill it up” every day. It sat there in the menu bar, right next to a
user’s profile image and user menu (see Figure 8.2).
FIGURE 8. 2
Only two donations in
the compassion jar so
far that day!

136 Chapter 8
Clicking the jar took the user to the donation page. After several
people asked for the ability to make a single, sizable donation, we
relented and included a one-time donation alternative to the recur-
ring model (see Figure 8.3).
FIGURE 8.3
When a 7 Cups user clicks on the compassion jar, they are encouraged to make
a donation (and while it defaults to a monthly option, the donor can now also
select a one-time donation).
In the long run, this did generate a small, steady trickle of revenue,
what one might call “pin money” or “petty cash,” but as I had antici-
pated in my gut, it was clear after a few months that this donation
model alone would never keep the entire business afloat.
By the way, 7 Cups is far from the only business to ask for donations
when providing a useful service. Another example I came across
recently is Bot Sentinel, which helps you determine whether accounts
you interact with on Twitter are bots (see Figure 8.4).

Getting the Money 137
FIGURE 8.4
Bot Sentinel asks for
donations, assuming
you want to support
their mission.
Experiment #2: Upgrades
One of our investors felt very strongly that we could monetize the
self-help features of our product, which is called the Growth Path.
This path comprised a series of steps somewhat like that of another
wellness product on the market, Headspace (the mindfulness,
meditation app): a series of calming exercises and other bite-sized,
self-help experiences.
Headspace used a classic freemium paywall at the time. (The first ten
mindfulness recordings were free, and then you paid a subscription
to unlock unfettered access to the rest of the library.)
We took a different approach with a basic free path and even a few
special paths for people dealing with specific struggles (such as

138 Chapter 8
addiction, or anxiety, or bullying, for example), and the rest were
“locked” and only accessible to people who paid to upgrade to a
premium subscription.
We offered monthly, yearly, and lifetime subscriptions, and we
experimented with the pricing and the presentation of these
choices over time.
We developed a new onboarding flow that I later called Yoga onboard-
ing, which introduced the self-help steps while the new member was
waiting for their first connection with a volunteer. This app offered
a simple, calming breathing exercise (see Figure 8.5).
FIGURE 8.5
After breathing along with
the pulsing sun image for
a while, the new member
could continue and try
another step, if still wait-
ing for a connection.
The new member could continue trying simple steps and gradu-
ally come to understand that they were taking a sequence of steps.
Eventually, we’d present them with the option of upgrading to get

Getting the Money 139
access to a premium path more specifically designed for their needs.
Over time, we experimented with when, where, and how to make
these offers, as well.
My biggest concern was that we were monetizing a secondary aspect
of the product. Our primary value proposition continued to be live,
one-on-one chatting with real people. Racking up subscribers to the
self-help area wasn’t bad per se, but it could lead us to divide our
focus and fail to excel in any single area, an omnipresent threat for
any product person.
This experiment was somewhat successful. It generated real substan-
tial revenue. By itself, it did not appear even after much optimization
to be on track to make us profitable and self-sufficient as a company,
but it was definitely extending our runway, and we were learning a
lot about what people were willing to pay for, what they valued, and
how they felt about recurring subscriptions.
Doubling down on an onboarding strategy geared toward signing
up “Growth Path” subscribers for $29/month, we developed our Yoga
onboarding design to start with simple steps (breathing, reflection)
before feeling committed to a path.
Somewhere along the way, we started our next revenue experiment.
Experiment #3: White Label
Our founder had some experience marketing to universities, and
the vast majority of our user base was in the 18–25 demographic, so
we developed a white label version of our product to sell initially to
schools. This was our first step away from B2C business models. This
put us squarely in the world of SaaS.
NOTE DEFINITIONS OF WHITE LABEL AND SAAS
A white label product is a generic version of a product designed
to be incorporated with an enterprise solution and given the
branding of the customer. SaaS stands for software as a service
and refers to enterprise software hosted by the vendor and paid
for via subscription.
In some ways, this was a natural fit. Universities and colleges
struggle to support their young populations as they experience the
incipient mental health challenges of adulthood, pressures from
home, coming of age, romantic challenges, and more. Aside from

140 Chapter 8
caring for their charges, these schools also have legitimate concerns
about attrition and even suicide.
Campus services are both limited in their reach and scope, as well as
in some cases all too visible for students or other community mem-
bers who might feel the need for mental health support as a stigma.
An anonymous support service provided through the same sort of
mobile chat interface every student has their nose in all day can be a
lot less anxiety provoking for anyone concerned about being judged
or feeling vulnerable for needing help.
We learned that some schools wanted to use our facilities to enable
their own students to provide support for each other, and others
welcomed our ability to offer our own volunteers while training their
students in our system.
We found we could charge schools’ medium-sized annual fees to
provide a version of our services to an entire campus or network of
schools, but supporting this type of customer also cost us a great deal
in terms of resources and focus.
It also raised for the first time the classic product vs. sales confronta-
tion where we had to have “the talk” with our sales reps about not
promising product features to close a deal without discussing them
with us first! Even with guardrails in place, the reality of larger-ticket
customers wanting extra security features, for example, drove our
product roadmap in directions different from where it might have
otherwise been steered, and worst of all, left us sometimes zigzag-
ging between multiple destinations over short stretches of time.
This white label model looked like it had potential, even with the
drag on our consumer roadmap, but it was also not going to grow
fast enough alone for us to align our entire business around that
model, so we started exploring another avenue for monetization:
therapists and professional therapy.
Experiment #4: Directory
While this ultimately came to little as a revenue source, we created a
professional directory for therapists, ostensibly competing with the
gold standard online directory of therapists, hosted by the magazine
Psychology Today. We wanted to offer an alternative marketplace
for these therapists and saw it as another potential subscription
revenue play.

Getting the Money 141
It was a bust financially, primarily because we had insufficient
leverage to offer a credible competitive alternative to the established
directory. (Famously, if a therapist got one referral a year from
their PT listing, it covered their subscription costs. We had no such
track record.)
But we did make this directory for an ulterior reason, as a building
block toward the next experiment, which was to offer online therapy
on our platform. Signing up to offer therapy via 7 Cups would then
require that the therapist set up a profile in the directory (see Figure 8.6).
FIGURE 8.6
Therapists in the 7 Cups directory provided another form of support for
community members beyond the free service provided by volunteers.
Experiment #5: Paid Therapy
It was time to try another freemium model—professional therapy.
This made a lot more sense to me than our attempts to monetize the
self-help Growth Path. The classic freemium model offers a core free
service and then charges for an enhanced, more fully featured, or
higher quality version of that same service.
Here, the idea was that for “free,” you could get support from well-
meaning volunteers, but also that “you get what you paid for.” If

142 Chapter 8
you felt you needed or could benefit from a somewhat more highly
trained form of support, and that you could afford it, then the
availability of a professional tier of service running on the same
communications and community platform would enable integrated
referrals relatively easily.
The existing community that sustained the free service needed
to be included in the discussion about changes and the need for
sustenance, and to be reassured that their roles would remain funda-
mental, and not relegated to a second-class status.
We updated the onboarding again, this time reverting to a chat-first
onboarding flow that offered a therapy upsell the first time the new
member asked to chat with a person (see Figure 8.7).
FIGURE 8.7
The 7 Cups onboarding chatbot (Noni) offered an option that would
refer a new member to the therapy chatbot (Sophia) to help with sign-
up and a subsequent assignment to a therapist.

Getting the Money 143
Therapy Experiments
Therapy showed some promise immediately, but it needed a lot of
work. We worked furiously to devise hypotheses and run experiments,
holding weekly growth sprints to keep our efforts on a tight cadence.
• We experimented with free trials.
• We optimized the heck out of the sign-up funnels (see Chapter 7,
“Testing Hypotheses with Experiments”).
• We worked hard on the program design for therapists and the
expectations of the therapy service itself.
• We developed dashboards for therapists to show how well they
were doing, some of which had counterproductive effects and
had to be tweaked or scrapped.
• We experimented with our queueing algorithm that assigned
new sign-ups to available therapists.
We stacked up a lot of wins, drove up our funnel conversion rates,
and improved our retention of subscribers and support for therapy
providers, without unduly hampering growth rates in our free
service and community. Eventually, we reached that holy grail of
start-ups—the break-even point (see Figure 8.8).
FIGURE 8.8
Fictionalized numbers for illustrative purposes and to protect privacy,
but this monthly revenue curve gives an idea of how and when therapy
took 7 Cups to the break-even point.

144 Chapter 8
We Were Now “Ramen Profitable”
This break-even point meant that, technically, we were profitable if
we brought in one penny more in a month than we spent. If nothing
changed, our runway was now theoretically infinite. Well, of course,
nothing stays the same forever, and stasis is death in business, but
even a temporary reprieve from the wolves at the door is something
to celebrate.
Nonetheless, we were profitable in the only way that a lean,
volunteer-powered start-up in a mission-driven space could be—by
keeping our expenses at a bare minimum, doing everything on the
cheap (our motto was “scrappy, not crappy!”), and by paying our-
selves well below market rates, which is itself not real sustainability
in the long run. In Silicon Valley, this model is sometimes called
being Ramen profitable.
One way or another, we needed to keep moving forward, but at least
now we had some options. Where could we go from here?
There were basically three approaches we could take (see Table 8.1).
TABLE 8.1 THREE DIRECTIONS FOR A BREAK-EVEN PRODUCT
Direction 1 2 3
Name Where we’re
going, there are
no roads.
The band is just
fantastic.
Go for broke.
Description Grow organically
with small
bets given
theoretically
infinite runway.
Optimize
LTV/CAG
(potential 2–5x
improvement
possible), raise
money, drive
lead-gen growth.
Pursue 100x
opportunities.
The first direction, “Where we’re going, there are no roads,” treated
the existing break-even business as a platform for experimentation.
Within the narrow range of subsistence, it allowed for efforts to find
new breakthrough products or even directions to pivot for much
greater value.
The second direction, “The band is just fantastic,” assumed that the
business model that just got the company to breakeven was the best
vehicle for making it truly profitable in a healthy sustainable way.

Getting the Money 145
The idea was that doubling down on the value in the core service and
paid version of it and using the same fierce honesty toward key met-
rics that pushed the rock up the hill in the first place would continue
to build upon the initial success in a steady, reliable way.
The third direction, “Go for broke,” resembled the first one super-
ficially, in that it took the current success as a platform for greater
things, but it involved swinging for the fences and looking for break-
through, game-changing, market-making opportunities, more or less
suggesting that if you’ve managed to figure out a way to get from 0 to
1, there was no reason to assume you couldn’t get from 1 to infinity.
Depending on the line of business, the economy, the competition,
and a host of other factors, any of these directions might have been
the right one for that product, or for yours.
Managing Multiple Lines of Business
It’s worth noting that the story of a company with one product getting
to breakeven involved experiments with multiple, different business
models, and entirely separate lines of business (see Figure 8.9). This is
not unusual, and while singular focus has its virtues, multiple lines of
business can present packaging opportunities.
FIGURE 8.9
Fictionalized data (to
protect the innocent)
illustrates how the lay-
ering of multiple lines
of business, some with
monthly pay cycles
and others with annual
pay cycles, contributed
to the growing revenue
for this product.
Revenue Lifecycles
While tales of launching products from scratch, growing a user base,
and then finding a way to pay for it all can be inspiring, it’s also risky
to focus on the initial stages of a product’s lifecycle to the exclusion

146 Chapter 8
of the ongoing dynamics around revenue, cost, budget, resources,
and finance.
A product that has established itself with a set of users and with a
relatively secure place in the product roadmap and the company
strategy is more likely to focus on sustaining and optimizing exist-
ing revenue streams, rather than trying to find something where
there is currently nothing. This approach may appeal to product
folks with less of a “frontier” mentality. In some ways, these are the
banker, supplier, and governance approaches that tend to follow
the pioneers.
Eventually, they will reach the end of their run and require “sunset-
ting” (shutting down). It can be a challenge to recognize and act on
this moment, as even dwindling revenue streams are hard to turn off.
Sustaining and Optimizing an Established
Product
The underlying mechanisms of sustaining or optimizing an estab-
lished product are the same. There are fixed costs and costs that
scale with use. There are recurring revenue streams and intermittent
forms of revenue. The moves are more fine-tuned, though, and more
about keeping a well-oiled machine humming, a reliable revenue
stream unclogged, and a stable customer base satisfied.
There is a long-term risk of complacency as an incumbent, according
to Clay Christensen’s famous “innovator’s dilemma.” It’s a dilemma
in the sense that incumbents don’t fail to innovate just because they
are weak or soft or jaded, but because a comfortable, established
product literally can’t afford to innovate. The risk to the existing
revenue stream is just too high. This creates the opportunities that
upstarts eventually take advantage of, which leads to the third and
final stage in the lifecycle of a product.
Sunsetting
All things must come to an end, and digital software products (and
the revenue streams and profits they may generate) eventually follow
suit. It’s probably no product manager’s favorite assignment, to pre-
side over the sunsetting and decommissioning of a product that has
outlived its usefulness, but this end-stage scenario draws on similar
proficiencies sets.

Getting the Money 147
Don’t believe me? Here’s what you need to decommission a product:
• Identify the decaying profit vs. loss patterns and make the tough
decisions about where and when to cut losses.
• Wind down commitments, set expectations, preserve security,
privacy, and other legal commitments.
• Ultimately, take a product entirely off the books of a business.
As you can see, this is a mirror image of the skills needed to build up
successful products in the first place!
What’s Money Without Customers or
Transactions?
It’s easier to talk about money in terms of transactions, whether paid
by a consumer at point of sale or by an enterprise customer via wire
transfer, but product management work outside of business still runs
on the same lifeblood as for-profit enterprise: money.
Government, nonprofits, other non-sales/business forms of orga-
nizations all have bills to pay. Money is the circulatory system of
the material world. In a nonprofit, donors and members provide
the resources, even if there are no revenues, per se. Software
development of new features or fixes to old bugs costs money for
governments, just as it does for companies. The money part of the job
never goes away, and there is no reason to shy away from it.
As a product manager, once you see the money flowing below the
surface of nearly every effort, you’ll recognize that in many ways, it
is as much a material that you are building with as the lines of code
or the pixels on the screens.
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A FINTECH PM
Michael Curry, head of product at 100x Group, an international crypto
(financial tech) start-up
How do you start your workday?
Check Slack and email.
How do you spend the early morning?
Getting coffee and planning out the day on a calendar.
How do you spend most of the morning?
Squeeze as much heads-down individual contributor work in as possible
before meetings.

148 Chapter 8
How does the morning end?
Meetings get rolling.
When do you take a lunch break?
12 noon.
What do you do first in the afternoon?
Sometimes coffee again. Take an hour to prepare for late afternoon meet-
ings during Asia morning.
How do you handle “fire drills” or other unplanned work?
Directly and hands on. I help multiple departments plan through incidents
and execute.
How do you spend the bulk of the afternoon?
More meetings, followed by documentation and recaps.
What do you do at the end of the workday?
Dinner with family. Help daughter with homework. Put baby to bed.
Do you work in the evening?
Frequently.
Key Insights
• Business and revenue are core product responsibilities.
• If you have created a valuable product, you can find a busi-
ness model to sustain it.
• It’s OK to try multiple revenue models.
• Don’t be afraid to abandon a revenue model that isn’t
working.
• It can work to maintain multiple revenue streams at different
levels of effort.
• Breakeven is a pivot point for any product where its road-
map is temporarily infinite.
• Financial inputs and outflows drive what’s possible for a
product at every stage of its lifecycle: establishing, sustain-
ing, and sunsetting.
• Even outside of transactional products, money is one of the
materials that a product manager works with.

CHAPTER 9
Healthy
Collaborative
Tension on the
Product UX
Spectrum
The Overlap and Its Disconnects 150
Where Do You Draw the Line? 152
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly 154
Where in the Org Chart? 157
When You’re Not a Designer Anymore 158
Being a Hybrid 159
Superfriends 161
Key Insights 161

150 Chapter 9
W
ith it pretty well
established that UX
practitioners and
product managers share many
concerns and deploy adjacent pro-
ficiencies, this leads to a perennial
struggle to define exactly who is
responsible for what. There are
as many schemes for divvying
up the work as there are teams
out there, but they are often some
variation on this formula:
• The product manager is
responsible for “what.”
• The UX designer is respon-
sible for “how.”
So, problem solved, right? Short
chapter, eh?
But, of course, even if we agree
on exactly what “what” refers
to versus “how,” exactly how
do you apply a rubric like that
in practice? Where do you work
separately, on what do you work
together directly, how do you
coordinate, and who has the final
say when you are collaborating?
The Overlap and Its
Disconnects
If you remember the product-UX
histogram from Chapter 3, “UX
Skills That Carry Over,” you will
recall that there are a number
of skills in the middle of the
spectrum that could plausibly be
handled by a UX expert or a PM,
depending on the team and the
context (see Figure 9.1).
FIGURE 9.1
The skills and implied tasks in
roughly the middle of the list might
fall to a UX person or a product
person, depending on the team.

Healthy Collaborative Tension on the Product UX Spectrum 151
The histogram is a conscious effort to avoid the ever-present Venn
diagrams typically used to show overlap and complexity and to help
with scoring. However, it can suggest a pronounced linear order or
sequence among these skills when their relationships are, in reality, a
lot fuzzier. So, when looking at the potential areas of overlap, giv-
ing in and plotting some of these skills in a Venn diagram can help
illustrate it (see Figure 9.2).
FIGURE 9. 2
A sampling of product/UX skills roughly sorted by discipline most likely to do
that task.
Abilities and skills shared between colleagues are a good thing,
and they cause no problems inherently, but in practice when there
is ambiguity about who is responsible for what or who has the final
say on what matter, this can lead to conflict, miscommunication,
and — most importantly — delivery of poor user experiences.
Conflicts may arise out of a simple lack of alignment or for more
sinister reasons. There are definitely people out there who still think
in terms of “turf” and try to fend off anyone from any other team
or school of thought whom they perceive to be encroaching on their
turf. This street-gang mentality isn’t great for collaboration, but if it

152 Chapter 9
exists, you need to be aware of it if you have any hope of shipping
great software with the team you’ve got.
Aside from outright arguments about who owns a particular project,
artifact, or work product, there is also a strong risk of duplication
if the product and UX folks pursue their individual agendas in an
uncoordinated way.
Each will do research, each will define concepts and models, and
each will produce specifications or other design artifacts that attempt
to address very similar issues in somewhat different ways, poten-
tially leading to all sorts of problems, including the following:
• Ambiguity at the development and delivery stage.
• Wasted cycles clarifying distinctions that never needed to be
created in the first place.
• Endlessly bouncing back and forth between two framings in an
infinite loop of a tug-of-war that ends only when someone higher
up the chain notices the paralysis on the team.
Where Do You Draw the Line?
A while back, I posted a question to my network that sounds decep-
tively simple: “Where do you draw the line between product and UX?”
Given my contacts in the “it depends” crowd, perhaps I shouldn’t
have been surprised at how many people tried to reject the premise,
questioning whether any such lines exist (or should exist at all).
Most people emphasized the gray area of overlap, which is understand-
able, given that it is where all the nuance lives, with replies such as:
• “You don’t. You enable each other to achieve the best customer
outcomes; but to be fair to customers, it doesn’t matter if there’s
a line between product management and design or not.” Jeewant
Singh Gupta, Product@HSBC
• “The better design leaders think like PMs. Some have crossed
over. I know many who aspire to. I’m surprised this isn’t talked
about more.” Dirk Cleveland, Senior Partner at Riviera Partners
• “Are gradients lines? I draw the line at delivery and skillset,
but both practices focus on the same thing: delivering results.”
Eduardo F. Ortiz, CEO Coforma

Healthy Collaborative Tension on the Product UX Spectrum 153
But lines are not bad things! They can give clarity. It’s understand-
able that people want to avoid sharp boundaries, but this confuses
the collaboration layer of work with the decision-making layer.
At the level of working together, yes, of course, let’s have no lines.
Let’s work shoulder to shoulder, looking at the same diagrams and
discussing them, handing the marker back and forth to doodle on
each other’s whiteboard thoughts, writing interview questions and
surveys together, but let’s also be clear: The product manager has to
decide whether the product is ready to ship. The UX strategist has
to make the final decision on the navigation taxonomy. And so on.
It’s not that any of these specific tasks must be owned by one role or
the other in the abstract. It always comes down to the specific people
involved, not stereotypes, but in each case, these matters of owner-
ship and “final say” need to be clarified, understood, and agreed
upon by all involved.
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
MATCHING AUDIENCE NEEDS TO BUSINESS PRIORITIES
Adam Connor, VP Design at Rocket Mortgage notes, “Research and design
is about needs and possibilities. What are the audience’s needs? What
opportunities does that create for the organization? What kinds of solutions
might meet those needs and opportunities and how would they work?
“Product management is about alignment, prioritization, and progress.
What is the org focused on right now? Which opportunities, needs, and
solutions does it make sense to focus on right now, given the business’s
priorities, capacity, and the progress made to date?
“Engineering is about stability, scalability, and enabling. How do you
build things so that they’re stable and perform well? So that they can be
scaled to handle growing audiences and demands? So they are flexible
and can be reused as your needs change? And in such a way that doesn’t
become a roadblock for future technologies and needs?
“The relationships between these things is symbiotic. Each needs the
others for both inputs and outputs. It isn’t an assembly line of one passing
decisions on to the next.
“Each (ideally) is an active participant in the conversations led by the
others, not as a limiting factor, but as an enabling one.”

154 Chapter 9
As Jeewant Singh Gupta said, “The ‘job’ for the product manager is
driving customer outcomes. As a product manager, anything that
improves or impacts customer outcomes matters to me. Whether
the design is researched, tested, and developed by someone else or
not remains immaterial. As the captain of the ship, I should not just
focus on steering the ship, but rather on all the radiators and needles
of things that make the ship move in the right direction. If I’m the
designer, sure — the line is a beautiful thing — it allows me to focus on
things that matter to me from a design outcome and stay true to that.”
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly
Before digging a little deeper into how product vs. UX tends to play
out these days, let’s take a step back and clarify one point. There is
a bit of a gap in the field right now between an idealized concept of
fully empowered product management and how the role tends to be
practiced in the majority of environments in the breach.
This gap can lead to some confusing discussions when product
management is framed in idealized (aspirational) terms. The
well-rounded, thoughtful, collaborative, creative, experimental,
compassionate PMs described in these books and blog posts don’t
always seem to match up to the lived experience of UX folks (and
others) working with the product people they’ve got.
There is a risk, too, of falling into the “No True Scotsman” fallacy
by excluding anybody practicing product management badly (too
rigidly, as an autocrat, without UX savvy, etc.) from being a “real”
PM, which is frankly a cop-out.
A better approach is to acknowledge this range of possibilities in
practice. There really are honest-to-gosh great PMs out there and
well-led highly empowered product organizations fostering many
great product teams, but this fully evolved model of product man-
agement is still the exception and not the rule in practice across most
organizations and industries. (If we’re honest, we’ll acknowledge that
something like this is also true for user experience, and the ideal-
ized model of UX research, strategy, and design often falls short in
practice when faced with resource, time, and leadership constraints.)

Healthy Collaborative Tension on the Product UX Spectrum 155
You can roughly sort real-world product/UX relationships into three
general buckets:
• The good: Teams that have healthy thriving collaboration about
product discovery and experience.
• The bad: Teams where the working relationship between prod-
uct and UX is faulty and needs work to reach its full potential.
• The ugly: Teams that propagate and reinforce toxic relationships
among the disciplines.
The Good
The hallmark of a good product-UX relationship is that the roles are
clearly defined and well understood by everyone involved. There are
many opportunities for collaboration and clearly negotiated “final
decision” ownership defined for each shared concern. The biggest
challenge here is to preserve this culture as the team succeeds and
scales up.
The Bad
The vast majority of product orgs live in this “bad” space where
folks mean well, but haven’t yet done the work to educate themselves
about each other’s disciplines, so there is a tendency to miscommu-
nicate or fall afoul of each other’s agendas, as well as a tendency to
spring “deliverables” on each other.
The opportunity here is to have those difficult conversations. This
can start at the individual practitioner level, when a UX designer or
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
COME TOGETHER ON OUTCOMES
Matt LeMay reframes this in a way that may be more realistic
about how role details get nailed down: “I think that on the
healthiest teams, the team’s shared outcomes are clearly defined and
well understood. People naturally figure out how to work together
toward those outcomes.”

156 Chapter 9
product manager or lead from one of those disciplines speaks up
and addresses uncomfortable or awkward truths. When everyone
can share how they wish things worked and what they are afraid of,
it’s usually not too hard to find alignment around shared goals and
interests and to surface, discuss, and come to “working agreements”
around the thus-far mismatched priorities.
Working agreements can be thought of as the social equivalent to
Agile’s “rough consensus and running code.” You don’t have to get it
all right in one go. That’s highly unlikely. But you can work out — for
now — some ground rules that are acceptable to all involved. These
don’t have to be ironclad unchangeable rules. You can work out a
rough consensus and give it try. Then you can use your product
mindset to retrospectively review and iterate on these working
understandings. Together with your counterparts, you can improve
these initial agreements through honest airing of what is working well
for whom and what is not, which practices are enabling people to show
up at their best, and how well the working agreements handle those
inevitable days when any of you are not able to be your best.
Individuals can only do so much. One thriving squad can function
as a “bright spot” and an example to others, but to really evolve an
entire product organization (no matter the size), at some point you
need leadership that is committed to working through these difficult
conversations at every level. In a mature org that is finally ready to
face these challenges, this may require something like time set aside
at a company offsite or a special “Product/UX Summit” occasion
with all the personnel involved together, or in the cases of very large
entities, a representative sample.
The Ugly
There are, of course, many “feature factories” out there, too, where
people with product titles function more as project managers (at
best) or overseers at worst, driving technical and design teams in
a command-and-control environment with little agency, let alone
opportunities to reframe questions, align projects with overarching
goals, or appeal to product vision or organizational values.
One solution for a UXer or budding product manager in such a toxic
environment is to run away. Get out of Dodge. Get a job that nurtures
you. But that is easier said than done as often as not, and even if

Healthy Collaborative Tension on the Product UX Spectrum 157
you are actively seeking a better opportunity, you may still need to
survive and operate in an ugly product environment for weeks and
months before escaping to the promised land.
So what do you do?
First of all, you pick your battles. If you go to total war over every
offense large and small against user-centered design or product
sense, then you will make enemies and end up either frozen out and
told to mind your business or shown the door.
Generally, your best bet is to choose when and where to hold your
ground and in those scenarios, use all of your craft skills to commu-
nicate why the approach being foisted on you will not work.
Do some research, even when you are told to skip that phase. Get
some data that hasn’t been cherry-picked to advance one PM’s road-
map item over another and make a case for an alternate approach.
Just as the devil can quote scripture with the best of them, data
selected to shape a narrative or win an argument will lead you down
the path to ruin, no longer helping you see what is really going on
and instead reflecting back to you a fun-house mirror that you hope
you can persuade other people to take for reality.
When overruled, make sure that goals are defined and metrics
tracked and ask for accountability when decisions are proven wrong
by the outcomes. None of this will be fun, but it can give you some
room to further your own practice with integrity until you can find a
more supportive environment.
Where in the Org Chart?
One matter that can complicate the product/UX relationship is an
org chart. Does UX report to product, or are they peer disciplines? Or
a little bit of both? That is, are there UX people and product manag-
ers reporting to a head of product (or VP product, CPO, director of
product, etc.), but functioning as peers at the individual contributor
level? In this latter scenario, does that head of product have experi-
ence outside of product management?
As noted previously, engineers rarely report to product managers,
although it’s not impossible. Engineers also tend not to report up
into product org hierarchies run by a product head, but again this is

158 Chapter 9
not unheard of. Still, there does seem to be a much greater willing-
ness to subordinate UX and design “under” product than there does
for engineering.
Caio B. Nishihara, who is a design lead at Ambev Tech said: “It’s
common to see UX reporting to product (as well as many other varia-
tions of reporting or independent areas) but surely if the company
sees design as a strategic driver, then it should keep it out of the
product report line to simply avoid ‘top-down effects.’”
If you go down the road of becoming a product manager and become
a lead, you will eventually find yourself revisiting these questions:
Is this your chance to finally make UX a full peer discipline? Can
you recruit a counterpart and devolve the team to them? Or by this
time, as a product leader who “knows your UX,” will you start to
think maybe there’s nothing wrong with you keeping both of them
in your portfolio?
In the end, it behooves you to focus less on how the lines of reporting
are officially structured and to focus more on the relationships with
your adjacent colleagues. Does it really matter if you both report up
to a product director or if one of you reports to a UX director and the
other to a product director?
When You’re Not a Designer Anymore
One caveat about shifting from a UX career to a product career is
adjusting your self image and accepting not so much that you are not
a designer any more (feel free to design things in your spare time!),
but that you are not the designer on the team anymore. Many a UX-
rooted PM has fooled themself into thinking that the UX people they
work with should welcome their design suggestions because, you
know, “they’re also a UX designer.”
Except you’re not. You took a different job.
You’re entitled to opinions. You can even share suggestions and
design ideas. But tread carefully! Just as a client may interpret a
wireframe literally despite all your pains to make it clear that it’s not
“the final design,” so, too, does a design “suggestion” from a product
manager who fancies themself to still be a designer come across as a
little too fully baked or, worse yet, as a command.

Healthy Collaborative Tension on the Product UX Spectrum 159
Being a Hybrid
If you consider transitioning over time from a UX practitioner to a
product manager, or even if you just continue to work in a digital
product context, you may find an opportunity at some point to take on
a dual role. This tends to happen at start-ups or on small new teams
being incubated inside larger organizations. Both of those scenarios
favor people with a wide range of skills and the flexibility to apply the
right tool to the right problem for the right amount of time.
In scenarios like this, you are still the designer, and it might sound
ideal, but in reality, it’s incredibly difficult because these really are
two separate jobs. Doing any two jobs at once is a lot of work, not
to mention the overhead of constant context shifting and having to
back up and refresh your working memory. Worse yet, you can’t have
honest disagreements with a peer because you are both people. How
do you sort out a really tricky question where one solution provides
a better user experience at the cost of sacrificing a different product
priority? You already know what you think. Challenging yourself is
harder than it sounds.
Still, such roles are a golden opportunity to start establishing both
disciplines in ways that are aligned and compatible with each other.
If you succeed and your team scales up, you can prioritize bringing
in a peer as soon as possible so that you can focus on the role that
suits you best.
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
THE AUTHOR’S TAKE
When I have had to function as an art director in partnership with
a UX designer or manager, I have tended to bend over backward
to speak in terms of the problem space and possible approaches.
If I feel the need to sketch an example to communicate an idea,
I “hang a lampshade” on what I’m doing to make it clear I am
illustrating a concept alone, and not offering a tactical solution
or user-interface suggestions.

160 Chapter 9
UX SUPERPOWER ALERT
SYSTEMS THINKING FOR CONTEXTUAL AWARENESS
Another perspective that crosses this same spectrum is service
design. Kristen Ramirez, senior user experience designer at Pro-
core Technologies, puts it this way:
“We don’t necessarily have all the tools. At the same time
I’m coming from UX, I’m doing UX really well. I’m doing more
research, I’m doing more service design. And I think there’s a
crossover there, too.
“I need to understand a business process because I need to
develop the application to support it. If I don’t understand
what people are trying to do, then I’m not going to make a very
good application.
“One of the sites that I worked on was the Uber developer site. All
of their enterprise data needs to be accessible and people need
to know how to get to it. There were a lot of moving parts with
that! It wasn’t just ‘how does someone do this,’ which is one of the
things, but really ‘how do all these objects relate to each other?’
“Coming from a design background, trying to speak technology
to a developer, there’s a lot you have to learn that you’re not go-
ing to be able to learn just by talking to someone.
“You need to kind of be able to model it, to really say, ‘I don’t
think I totally understand these bits. Let me try to draw some-
thing for you to show these relationships.’ That’s what I’m always
about: trying to pick up the languages of other people that I
work with.
“I’ve done a little bit of development in my past, front end. Not
anything compared to the front end these days, but that still
does wonders for working with the development team. I know
that this is going to be weird or this is gonna be hard, or I’m go-
ing to have to ask questions about this thing. I think it’s the same
for business. That was where service design was able to give me
that bridge.
“It’s really an operations problem, although the design is hopefully
part of the solution. If you don’t understand the whole ecosystem,
you’re going to pigeonhole your design.”

Healthy Collaborative Tension on the Product UX Spectrum 161
Superfriends
I hope it doesn’t sound naïve to suggest that we are on the verge of
an incredible blossoming of product experience collaboration. The
two concerns are so closely joined together and with a modicum of
coordination and communication — two things that both product
managers and UX people always claim to be good at — there’s no
reason why they can’t be flowing together in a high-performance
dance that multiplies one another’s impact in an ever compounding
cycle of user-obsessed awesomeness.
Key Insights
• There’s no one answer to where you draw the line between
product and UX.
• Nonetheless, each team does need to do the work required to
draw these lines.
• Lines don’t prevent collaboration, but they clarify who
decides what.
• Well-run product teams work through potential conflicts and
establish well-understood agreements about who is respon-
sible for what.
• In a toxic product environment you need to pick your battles,
document goals and metrics, and look for points of leverage
(while planning your exit strategy).
• UX may report to product, but this doesn’t really change the
communication and collaborative effort required to achieve
alignment.
• A product manager with a UX background is not a UX
designer and shouldn’t pretend to still be one.
• Hybrids are both product managers and UX practitioners.
This sounds like a dream gig, but it’s more of a frankenjob.
• There’s really no reason why product and UX folks can’t
soar together.



CHAPTER 10
Roadmaps and
How to Say “No”
Defining the Roadmap 164
Feasible Horizons: Now, Next, Later 166
Product Strategy 168
Prioritization 171
Populating and Maintaining the Roadmap 179
Epilogue to the “Break-Even” Story 181
The Art of Saying No 182
Key Insights 187

164 Chapter 10
T
hat’s a great idea,” I remember telling a Ph.D. with deep
expertise into human interaction who was working at the time
in the innovation lab of a huge tech company. “I love it, but
how are you going to get it onto the roadmap?”
If you ask enough UX people what it is the product manager has
control over that they wish they had more say in, one thing you’ll
hear about a lot is the roadmap. For the product manager’s peers and
ordinary stakeholders, the roadmap can represent an opaque and
even arbitrary lockbox that prevents them from getting the feature
or design they want into the product.
For the product manager’s upper management, the roadmap often
represents a commitment to deliver specific features on specific dates
and a source of angst, disappointment, and constantly reset expectation.
Some of the more common things you’ll hear about a product
roadmap from people in a tech company (including the product
managers) are variations of these questions:
• “Where is the roadmap?”
• “Is the roadmap up-to-date?”
• “Where are we on the roadmap?”
So, a roadmap is obviously a metaphor, but for what? What does it
actually mean? What’s the car, what’s the road, what’s the destina-
tion, and what are the rest stops? Maybe let’s park the car on the
shoulder and look this thing over calmly to figure out what exactly
a roadmap is trying to tell you.
Defining the Roadmap
The songwriter Mose Allison once wrote “Everybody’s crying mercy,
but they don’t know the meaning of the word.” So, too, will you hear
everyone talking about roadmaps but very few people agreeing on
exactly what a roadmap is and what it’s supposed to do.
What Is a Roadmap?
As the metaphor implies, a roadmap is a plan for the “road” ahead,
a map of where you hope to take your product, feature, or line of
products. In some ways, it’s more like the old “TripTik” that AAA
“

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 165
still puts together for you to customize your road trip with just the
stretches of highway and surface roads you’ll need to cover to get to
your destination.
So what is the destination, in this metaphor? It turns out that is often
the source of confusion. Inside a product team, a roadmap helps
identify (and build consensus around) what to build now, what to
plan for now to build next, and what to plan for next. It provides a
way of tracking whether efforts are focused on the most important
goals and if adequate progress is being made along the way.
Outside of product teams, most people view a roadmap as a com-
mitment to ship specific features on certain dates in the months and
years ahead, but this is a dangerous misconception that causes end-
less grief for product teams and equally frustrating disappointment
for outside stakeholders.
A Roadmap Is Not a Launch Plan
The biggest problem communicating about roadmaps is inevitably
stakeholders interpreting it as a launch plan. If the roadmap suggests
that you’ll be adding the new “Post to TikTok” feature to your cook-
ing app in Q2 and July rolls around without the feature shipping, it’s
understandable that people are going to interpret that as a failure
and a broken promise.
They may have built launch plans and a marketing campaign around
this feature. They will be less likely to trust your predictions and
commitments in the future, and they may invest less in supporting
your feature launches in the future to minimize risk from a “once
burned, twice shy” perspective.
By the way, the solution to this problem is to make actual release and
launch plans in collaboration with your sales and marketing teams,
and include in it only things you actually can commit to shipping
and only when you can commit to real dates. When people treat the
product roadmap like a launch plan or complain that it doesn’t look
like a Gantt chart (see Figure 10.1), give them what they want but just
keep clarifying that the project plan to ship a specific feature or set of
releases on a schedule is a different artifact from the roadmap.

166 Chapter 10
FIGURE 10.1
If your stakeholders need a release plan, give them one, as shown in this Smart-
sheet template, but at the same time clarify that this is not a product roadmap.
Feasible Horizons: Now, Next, Later
A launch plan is anchored to fixed dates with dependencies running
backward along a critical path. Wearing a project management hat,
you can drive a team toward a launch, trim where needed to keep
on track, detect and resolve problems in time, or negotiate new dates
with sufficient advance warning when reality intervenes versus your
best-laid plans.
A roadmap, by contrast, is a forward-looking document used to
prioritize (primarily) near- and medium-term efforts. It is best struc-
tured into three rough time frames that can be viewed as a receding
horizon getting less sharp as it gets further away: Now, Next, and
Later (see Figure 10.2).
Now
Ideas in the Now bucket are things that your team is actively work-
ing on currently. This tends to mean things your developers are
working on, code you are writing, things you are trying to ship (as
opposed to ideas you are still just “noodling” with), etc.

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 167
FIGURE 10. 2
This empty product roadmap template (using ProdPad) has three main
columns, one for each time frame.
Next
Items in the Next bucket are “on deck,” as they say in baseball. They
are the things you hope to work on next, once the things you are
working on now are done. Ah ha, you say! No idea is ever done! True,
but the ideas in these buckets are expressed in achievable chunks,
and a specific product or feature may be the subject of an ongoing
series of ideas.
Developers are usually not actively working on (or preparing to work
on) the items in the Next bucket except occasionally to provide some
technical ballast for planning and ideation sessions. On the other
hand, product managers and UX designers generally are working
on these ideas (or their precursors) with stakeholders, so that by the
time there is room in the Now bucket, the ideas are ready for devel-
opers to work on them directly.

168 Chapter 10
Later
Things in the Later bucket are important ideas that the team is
building toward but not ready to work on actively. They may be too
speculative at this time, or too dependent on executing Now items or
even some of the Next items as well. It’s not really worth anyone’s time
to research, design, or architect these items, beyond capturing the idea
as accurately as you can at this time. Then, when there is room in the
Next bucket, the team can really start digging in to explore these ideas.
Product Strategy
OK, none of this sounds like rocket science so far, you may be thinking,
but what goes into each column? Or maybe you’re not asking yourself
because you think you already know and the answer is features, but
that’s not it.
A product roadmap is not a list of features.
Features (or bug fixes, or experiments, or any other changes you ship
to your codebase) are (tentative) solutions. They are the results of
your research, design, and development work. What you learn after
releasing a feature feeds back into your research in the endless build,
measure, learn cycle.
So it’s a mistake to jump right to features and start dropping them
onto a plan. Not only does it lock you into specific solutions before
you’ve done the work, but it also sets concrete expectations with
stakeholders leading them back down the path of seeing your road-
map as a release plan.
So what do you put in the roadmap? Outcomes, organized into
themes, that are laddering up to company objectives.
Outcomes
You don’t put features in your roadmap, you put outcomes. Results.
Things you want to happen, such as:
• Double retention
• Increase customer satisfaction by 50%
• Support user requests for more ways to collaborate with each other
• Improve performance
• Reengage with formerly active users

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 169
There might be any number of strategies for achieving the outcomes
listed (made up) above, and any strategy might suggest a number of
tactics worth trying. One of these tactics might be a feature that you
might design, build, and ship, but there’s no need to lock yourself
into a specific narrow, potential solution now. It’s better to describe
what the successful outcome you want looks like and then let the
team figure out how to get there.
Organized into Themes
Defining a set of themes to organize and associate outcomes helps
keep things aligned, balanced, and legible. It helps you avoid hav-
ing to sift through a completely random bucket of outcomes, and it
provides a framework for recognizing that thematically related goals
and initiatives often require an ongoing series of efforts that will
span multiple quarters.
It may be tempting to structure roadmap items in terms of the
specific product area or functionality they relate to, but “sign-up,”
“sharing,” and “profile management” aren’t themes. They are seg-
ments of your product. There’s nothing wrong with tracking this
metadata and even indexing or sorting it, but it’s not the right way to
organize your roadmap by default.
Themes tend to cluster around related goals — such as user growth,
retention, revenue targets, network effects, behavioral patterns, and
others — defined in your product strategy with the aim of fulfilling
your business strategy (or, if you are in a non-business sector, your
organization’s overarching strategy).
Laddering Up to Company Objectives
This nesting of strategy is key to product alignment. The organization
has goals: long-term goals, goals for this year, goals for this quarter or
half. The product team within the organization therefore owns some
of the responsibility for helping the org achieve those goals.
If you’re in a product-centered org, then the product team may be
driving most of the overall strategy.
At the leadership level, the head of product coordinates with the rest
of the executive team to negotiate commitments the product team can
make to the org as a whole in order to fulfill larger objectives. Many

170 Chapter 10
tech companies use OKRs (Objectives and Key Results) as a framing
device for:
• Articulating clear objectives (basically the same as goals or
outcomes)
• Identifying key results that are measurable and can either con-
firm or falsify whether the goal was achieved, or in the case of
goals that can be achieved in whole or in part, measure to what
extent the goal was achieved
• Aligning OKRs up and down an organization so that the objec-
tives of any given team fulfill the key results of the team or
leader they report to, all the way up (and down) the chain
Owning the Roadmap, or Part of It
If you are the head of product (congratulations!), then you probably
own the whole roadmap. If you’re anyone else in the product org,
then you probably own just a piece of it. (If you’re junior enough, you
may not actually own any of it, but you will at least be included in
discussions about plans for the part of the product you are currently
working on.)
For example, a large product organization might have the following
levels of ownership laddering up to the roadmap:
• A product portfolio consisting of several lines of products owned
by a Chief Product Officer
• A line of products owned by a VP of Product
• A specific product in a line of products owned by a Product
Director
• A major piece of functionality (onboarding, administration, core
experience, etc.) owned by a Group Product Manager
• A feature owned by a Product Manager
• A backlog owned by a Product Owner
More often than not, outside of enterprise tech companies, you will
not have that many levels of articulation and ownership, but the
conceptual gradations exist at any scale.
In such larger organizations, the demand for product operations (or
“product ops”) starts to grow to manage the orchestration of multiple
lines of business all trying to make use of the same product and

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 171
development resources, and this alone can become a complex part of
the roadmap planning process.
So let’s say that you do own at least some piece of the roadmap;
that you are thinking in time horizons of Now, Next, and Later;
you’re aligned with your team on the major themes in your product
strategy, and you’ve got a nice big backlog of great ideas for how to
achieve important outcomes across all those themes.
How do you determine which idea goes in which bucket? This is a
matter of prioritization, something that you are responsible for driving
and achieving alignment on across all stakeholders, even if you are not
empowered to simply make all the tough calls yourself directly.
Converting the wishes and ideas of an org into a clear, usable road-
map is a fundamental responsibility of the product team, and it
doesn’t ever come easy.
Prioritization
Products are more than just a bundle of features and bug fixes, and
roadmaps are more than just a giant wish list.
The product practice sits at the nexus of every input into, and
every stakeholder of, the customer experience that represents your
company’s brand. Product people shoulder the difficult but critical
responsibility of weighing the opportunities (and risks) and forging
a consensus that moves the team forward and helps deliver valuable
outcomes.
There will always be a surplus of great ideas, new problems, ongo-
ing unaddressed issues, deep-pocketed partners, eager sales efforts,
business fads, and competitive setbacks. There will always be too
many good ideas to do them all at once, without even getting into
the opportunity costs involved in each or the fact that many good
ideas are mutually incompatible. For example, you can’t have two
top priorities. You can have any number of important things that you
think matter, but only one of them can be the top priority (and if not,
then you have zero top priorities, not two).
Weighing these priorities, wishes, good ideas, problems, etc. against
each other is a fundamental product practice that takes place at every
level of the business. Whoever speaks for product in the C-suite will
ultimately decide what the entire product org or effort focuses on,
what gets funded, who gets hired, headcount, and so on.

172 Chapter 10
Product leadership needs to address and respond to the business
strategy through a product roadmap and operational plan. Product
practitioners need to make hard choices about what to ship, what to
work on next, the order of the backlog, the priority of bugs, and so on.
Prioritization Methods
It’s important to tackle prioritization in a systematic way. There is
no one single ideal prioritization method or process or exercise that
will suit every occasion and context, but there are always too many
good ideas to go around. Stakeholders with varying degree of insight
and claim over outcomes all need to be understood, respected, and
addressed, and a transparent open process for weighing and evaluat-
ing priorities works best.
The most common prioritization methods involve weighing the effort
to execute an idea against the potential impact of doing so. In its sim-
plest form, all ideas can be rated as high or low effort and then high
or low impact. This approach enables a first-order rough sort. High
impact, low effort things go first! Low impact, high effort things
never happen. The other two categories then require more careful
orchestration to balance the longer term and larger efforts that may
yield profoundly good results against the drumbeat of relatively trivial
or tactical tasks that are easy to do but won’t “move the needle.”
Impact vs. Effort
The next level of sophistication for that process is to use T-shirt sizes
for estimates (small, medium, and large or S, M, L), which gives you
another point on each scale. Most commonly, a large surface such
as a wall is cleared to enable an X- and Y-axis with Y (vertical) for
impact and X (horizontal) for effort. The same logic applies at all of
these scales: the stuff farthest in the high impact/low effort corner
comes first, and it’s the diagonal in the middle that requires the
most scrutiny.
For more complex decisions, use frameworks such as RICE (reach,
impact, confidence, and effort). This model keeps the concept of effort
and impact from the simple one above, but also gives you a variable
to scope the reach of the idea (is it going to impact all of your custom-
ers all the time? new users? a subset of existing users? etc.), as well a

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 173
variable to capture how confident the estimate (or the consensus of
the group) is, relative to other ideas.
This latter factor helps address the subjectivity of a quasi-algebraic
scoring model such as RICE, but ironically does so by introducing an
additional subjective variable.
Important vs. Urgent
Impact vs. effort builds on the concept of the Eisenhower matrix. The
Eisenhower matrix is a two-by-two grid that divides tasks, projects,
or goals first by whether they are urgent or not, and then by whether
they are important or not. The great advantage of this analysis is that it
prevents you from confusing urgency for importance (and vice versa).
It is far too easy for anyone at any level of an organization to become
reactive to urgent interruptions, emergencies, crises, deadlines,
launch dates, publicity schedules, quarterly reports, and so on. It is
not possible to avoid urgent priorities, and, of course, most urgent
things need to be addressed. But keep in mind that not everything
that’s urgent is important, and not every urgent thing needs to be
handled at the highest level.
More critically, there are many important things that are not urgent
in the sense that they are not due immediately and they are not
blocking anything right now but are being postponed. The great risk
then becomes that these things never get addressed (or, more likely,
only ever get addressed when they become urgent, generally by way
of catching on fire).
This analysis reminds you to plan and schedule longer term and
slower-burning matters so that they come to fruition when they
are needed, and you escape the “take-a-crisis-number” method
of planning that is more akin to a panic attack than a sustainable
execution process.
The Eisenhower matrix (Figure 10.3) reminds you to do those things
that are urgent and important immediately, and decide when impor-
tant things that are not urgent need to happen (schedule them). It
tells you to delegate the things that are urgent but not important to
you directly, and to delete (forget about) the things that are neither
urgent nor important enough to ever be worthy of your attention.

174 Chapter 10
FIGURE 10.3
The famous Eisen-
hower Matrix helps you
plan ahead for impor-
tant things that are not
literally on fire at right
this exact moment.
This sort of analysis helps with the broad sorting of goals and ideas
into priorities and helps minimize wasted effort and falling into
reactivity, but it’s not really granular enough for most roadmap
prioritization needs.
OK, So Back to Impact vs. Effort
Another two-by-two grid (or magic square as some business consul-
tants seem to want to call them) compares impact vs. effort. This is
the bedrock trade-off that lies at the core of most product decisions
and requires you to think things through along these lines:
• How much value are you likely to derive from doing this thing?
• How much work will it take for the team to pull it off?
• What are the opportunity costs of doing this thing and therefore
not having time to do that thing?
Plotting impact vs. effort helps clarify these points. Sometimes, par-
ticularly when facilitating workshop-type sessions with a large group
of stakeholders, it makes sense to use a Cartesian plot (X- and Y-axes)
and actually rank each item against both scales (see Figure 10.4).

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 175
FIGURE 10.4
If you need a lot of
granularity, put a big
Cartesian plot on your
whiteboard and place
stickies in locations
that correspond to
degrees of effort and
potential impact.
Generally, though, you don’t need to focus on assessing precise
relative effort or impact estimates between pairs of ideas, so much as
roughly sorting them into four buckets by defining the impact and
effort of each item as either “high” or “low” and then placing them in
the quadrant that corresponds to that intersection (see Figure 10.5).
FIGURE 10.5
Sorting ideas into these
four buckets helps priori-
tize them at a high level.

176 Chapter 10
Once you sort your ideas into these buckets, then — as with the
Eisenhower matrix — you can take a different tack with each of the
four categories (see Figure 10.6).
FIGURE 10.6
Drop everything and do
those high-impact, low-
effort ideas!
1. Definitely do high-impact, low-effort things. They should be the
“no brainers” at the top of your list.
2. Meanwhile, review the ideas that would be high impact but
would require much effort. You can’t do all of these things, but
you should invest effort in some of them (as with the non-urgent
but still important items in the Eisenhower matrix).
3. Just maintain basic quality control through housekeeping, fixing,
and tackling low-effort, low-impact items when convenient.
4. Immediately delete and spend no more brainpower or cycles on
things that would require high effort without promising any-
thing more than low impact.
Figure 10.7 shows some ideas sorted into an impact vs. effort matrix
for an imaginary product.

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 177
FIGURE 10.7
Without being too
obsessed with posi-
tioning, the stickies are
placed in the squares
roughly relative to
each other (with
higher impact going
higher up vertically
and higher effort items
going further to the
right) in each square.
NOTE T-SHIRT SIZING
As noted earlier, when estimating effort, another useful rough
sort is called T-shirt sizes (typically meaning small, medium, and
large, usually abbreviated to S, M, and L, but sometimes extend-
ed with things like XS, XL, XXL, and so on). This method is great
when planning a sprint, but in a two-by-two matrix, medium im-
pact or medium effort items still have to be forced into a small or
large bucket, even if you want to show them hugging the edge.
So . . . Many . . . Frameworks
If you start digging into prioritization frameworks, you are going to
discover quickly that there are an infinitude of them. Many of them
are good! It helps to be conversant with multiple approaches partly
so that you have a toolkit that you can adapt to different types of
prioritization scenarios (What should the squad work on next sprint?
What should the team build next quarter? What are the product goals
for the second half of the year?), and partly so that you can adapt to
the prevailing methods when joining an existing team.

178 Chapter 10
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
FRAMEWORKS HELP YOU COMMUNICATE
Matt LeMay said, “I like to think of all of these as communication
frameworks. The framework won’t help you make a perfect deci-
sion, but it will help you communicate how you made a necessarily
imperfect decision.”
Andrea Saez of ProdPad’s “What is the best framework to prioritize
what to work on next?” published at Product Manager HQ offers a
great overview of prioritization methods and how to know which
approach to use when. She boiled her advice down thusly:
Prioritization is not a linear process, and happens at different
stages of development. Start with your objectives, find problems
to solve, and run discovery to better understand how different
items may give you the desired outcome. Frameworks help you
understand and visualize information, foster conversations, and
discussions. They are not there to make decisions for you.
A great next step beyond simple impact vs. effort, for example, is the
RICE framework, which also brings into account two further dimen-
sions, “reach” (R) and “confidence.” (C).
• Reach means the potential audience impact of the idea (similar
to the traffic dimension of the experimental pipeline prioritiza-
tion engine discussed in Chapter 6, “Product Analytics: Growth,
Engagement, Retention”). When you consider this, it can help
you calibrate ideas against each other (since a big impact with
a smaller audience may not actually be bigger than a smaller
impact with a bigger audience).
• Confidence is a percentage used to challenge how sure you are
about your assessments of the potential reach, impact, and effort.
It gives more credit to ideas supported by evidence.

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 179
Populating and Maintaining the
Roadmap
OK, but what happened to the roadmap? Well, the end result of all
that prioritization, remember, is to place ideas within time horizons
to figure out what to work on now, what to prepare to work on next,
and what to keep an eye on for later (see Figure 10.8).
FIGURE 10.8
The ideas sorted by our imaginary product team placed on a thematic
roadmap with relative time horizons.
As a product manager, you’re really recommending what should
go on the product roadmap and where. When you (or your team)
presents the roadmap to leadership, it needs to obtain their buy-in,
or you’ll be sent “back to the drawing board” to try again. So the
roadmap is also a proposal or a position in an argument.
When There Is No Roadmap
If you are making the first roadmap, congratulations! You have a
blank slate. You’ll need to gather input from all your sources and
signals, assess them, prioritize them, obtain buy-in, and then com-
municate the plan to all stakeholders. So, mission accomplished?
Not quite. That’s just the beginning. Maintaining a roadmap is an
ongoing responsibility.

180 Chapter 10
Keep a Roadmap Fresh
There is a tendency to make a roadmap and then set it on a shelf and
only refer to it when the quarter ends or when the board is demanding
an update, but this defeats the purpose of planning anything. Instead,
you need to revisit the roadmap (or your bit of it) on a regular schedule:
• On a monthly basis (if not each sprint), review the current work-
load of your team against the roadmap and make sure that the top
commitments are getting attention. If the team is getting pulled
into things that are not in the plan, escalate this to the attention
of your boss. This does not mean refusing to do unplanned work
(which would hardly be “agile”), but making sure that the road-
map doesn’t drift away from reality and become useless. Instead,
any gap between planned work and actual is new information to
be fed back into the discussion and used to reset expectations and
make intentional choices about new trade-offs.
• Each quarter, you should revisit the roadmap with all the
stakeholders, review what was done, what has moved from Next
to Now, what has moved from Later to Next, and what new ideas
need to be tracked for Later.
Managing Expectations
There is no way to avoid the expectation that your team is going to
ship certain promised features or solutions or fixes by committed
deadlines. You should do your best to communicate that a roadmap
deals with a series of time horizons that necessarily get vaguer and
more speculative the farther out you go. Still, no matter how care-
fully you build and present your roadmap in ways to avoid looking
like a Gantt chart, your stakeholders will still want to know when to
expect the launch or next release.
Thematic roadmaps don’t get you out of obligations.
They can help frame the conversation, though. When you present a
roadmap covering time frames called Now, Next, and Later, and a
stakeholder points to an item in the Next bucket and asks you when
you expect the team to get to that, what do you say?
One thing you can do is map the horizons to approximate chunks of
time. Here is an example that worked for me:
• Now refers to this quarter, a roughly 1–3 month period, depend-
ing on where you are in the quarter.

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 181
• Next is the six-month period following the current quarter. The
items in that bucket will likely come to fruition in that period,
but it’s impossible to be more specific. (So at this point, the plan
covers roughly 7–9 months.)
• Later is the nine-month period that takes you out to about a year
and a half from the start of the current quarter. It’s pretty much
impossible to make plans farther out than 18 months, and the
items you’ve parked in the second half of that time frame are
necessarily broad and subject to revision every time you reevalu-
ate your roadmap.
Beyond that, the best way to manage the expectations of the people
looking to your roadmap as the best insight into what to expect from
your team is to present roadmap updates and status reports to the
larger organization on a regular basis, at least once a quarter and
more frequently for the teams directly adjacent to your own.
Epilogue to the “Break-Even” Story
As you may recall from an anecdote in Chapter 8, “Getting the
Money,” a start-up for which I ran the product team, 7 Cups, man-
aged to break even after a series of revenue experiments. If you want
to know how things went after we hit breakeven, well that story
hasn’t really finished, although my part of it has come to an end, but I
can fill in what happened next. At this point, we faced three paths:
• Where we’re going there are no roads: Break-even business as a
platform for experimentation
• The band is just fantastic: Doubling down on the value in the
core service and the paid version of it
• Go for broke: Looking for breakthrough, game-changing,
market-making opportunities
We started down path number two with a roadmap geared toward
tightening up our offering, continuing to optimize our sign-up flow
and subscription service, improving at scaling the paid service tier,
and ultimately making enterprise deals with health and insurance
providers better positioned to underwrite emotional support and
gain the benefits of broader services than point-of-sale consumer
transactions could ever accomplish.

182 Chapter 10
Along the way, a shiny government innovation contract presented
itself and tempted the business onto path three, searching for another
radical breakthrough.
Sadly, around the time I left, that approach had fizzled out, and I
fear there might have been a missed opportunity to scale the initial
success, but the good news is that this has likely forced the current
leadership to focus again on path no. 2, which still to my mind
represents a winner.
The Art of Saying No
The hardest part of being the person who has to establish priorities
is protecting them once the rubber meets the road. There will be
an endless supply of requests — heartfelt, sincere requests — for a
dispensation to add just one more special new thing to the roadmap.
There will also be demands from people with more power than you.
And there will be endless “suggestions” from folks whom you need
to work with, but whose ideas you are not willing (or able) to put
ahead of your real priorities.
Fielding and addressing these cross-pressures is demanding, espe-
cially when you’re not the boss, and even a chief product officer must
stand naked (metaphorically speaking) and defend priorities against
a CEO or a board when whoever signs their paychecks demands
due consideration for a fresh idea (even if that idea did come from a
recent Harvard Business Review article the CEO’s first-class seatmate
summarized for them on the flight home from Cabo).
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
GETTING TO YES
As a counterpoint, Matt LeMay pointed out a danger is this nega-
tive framing: “I see PMs fall in love with saying ‘no’ and miss out
on critical information. From my point of view, the goal is to ask
‘why’ before you say ‘yes’ or ‘no.’ Whenever an exec comes to you
with a new idea or somebody tries to override something, there’s a
reason behind that, and it’s your job to understand that reason.”

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 183
Who Will You Have to Say No To?
At various times, you may have to find a way to say no to any of a
wide range of potential stakeholders, including:
• Customers
• Partners
• Advisors
• Sales, Business Development, Partners, and Customer Success
• Marketing
• Engineers
• UX Designers (sorry!)
• CEOs
And you can’t blow these people off. You don’t need to capitulate and
let them disrupt your best-laid plans (most of the time), but you do
need to give them the time of day.
Who Does Have a Say?
Ellen Chisa, a product leader and currently Founder-in-Residence at
Boldstart Ventures, likes to note that there are four main inputs that
contribute to your roadmap to varying degrees at different stages of
product development (as in this talk on YouTube
1
):
1. The product vision
2. Feedback from users
3. What the data is telling you
4. Ideas that come from the rest of the team (bandwidth permitting)
That first slice in some scenarios is the “CEO features,” but in an
empowered product team, they are arising out of product strategy.
Still, there is usually a CEO or equivalent in the picture, and there is
no shame in accepting that they have a legitimate right to drive at least
some portion of the roadmap, as the person ultimately responsible for
the well-being of the enterprise and the execution of its strategy.
Nonetheless, saying no to the boss is still part of the job, as unpleas-
ant as it may be in reality, and when the time comes for you to make
the presentation, ideally you’ll have practiced letting lower-level
stakeholders down easy any number of times, to hone your tactics.
1 “Balance: Prioritizing Your Roadmap Across Product Stages” www.youtube.
com/watch?v=udobV6mIGjg

184 Chapter 10
Most of the time, the key to saying no is not to negate the value of
the request or the significance of it for the requester. In fact, the best
approach is something like this:
1. Thank the stakeholder for offering their advice.
2. Ask questions about the suggestion: What problem is it intended
to solve or opportunity is it intended to exploit? What is the
expected outcome of delivering this feature or ideas? What are
the risks of not doing it? Were other ways to address this situa-
tion considered?
3. Offer to research and explore the problem space further.
4. Review the current top priorities in the Now bucket and how
they connect to company strategy, objectives, and key results.
5. Ask which of the commitments that have already been presented,
argued for, and have obtained buy-in should be set aside to pur-
sue this new potential priority. Remind them that these changes
will need to be reviewed and reevaluated by all stakeholders.
6. Ask for data to justify this priority and have your own data
ready to make the case for the priorities you already fought for
and won.
7. And, finally, if overpowered and forced to elevate an unwanted
priority, be sure to define success metrics, measure the impact,
and report back eventually, both on the eventual outcome of the
novel idea, as well as the impact of dropping the priorities that
had to be cut to make room.
By the way, sometimes the idea that the boss makes you do is a good
one, and it turns out they were right. It’s all part of the job.
When the Brass Wants Aha!
If you’ve gone down the road of a thematic, outcome-oriented
roadmap with increasing time frames and have successfully avoided
being forced to produce a list of features and ship dates under the
heading “roadmap,” you’ll likely find that a product such as ProdPad
is ideally suited to this approach. (It’s no coincidence that one of their
founders, Janna Bastow, has championed this model and influenced a
generation of product managers in this direction.)
But this is not going to change the fact that your stakeholders will still
want to know when new things are going to ship, and the executive

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 185
types are quite likely to find ProdPad’s presentation options somewhat
hard to follow. The more complex your product portfolio, and the
more strongly they are hoping for something like a Gantt chart, the
more likely you may find yourself pressured into adopting (or at least
“evaluating”) another roadmap product, like Aha! (Figure 10.9).
FIGURE 10.9
If you have a complex roadmap and need to communicate it in multiple ways,
a tool like Aha! can help (but it may drag you back into the “release plan vs.
roadmap” battle all over again).
Aha! is powerful and provides many more dimensions of complexity
than ProdPad does. Their model of products, projects, epics, and so
on may not map perfectly to your product taxonomy, but it is fairly
malleable and can be adapted to fit many complex environments.
It also offers the ability to maintain entirely separate views of your
roadmap. This means you can, for example, make one version with
strong presentation values for a marketing department slide deck or
a sales presentation. At the same time, you can maintain an internal
version of the roadmap that “lets it all hang out,” including internal
maintenance, technical debt, and other unglamorous priorities, and
provides more working detail.
Ultimately, you need to be agnostic about tools and able to ply your
trade with whatever kit prevails in your current shop. When you’re
the boss or building your own product org, you can own the exciting
task of selecting which product operations tools will unleash the
awesome potential of your team.

186 Chapter 10
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A SAAS PM
Ian Johnson, Principal/Director of Product at Flow Commerce, Inc.
What industry do you work in?
E-commerce
How mature (or how long established) is the organization you work for?
4 years, 70 people
Share anything else that might help describe the environment in which you
practice product management:
SaaS products B2B
How do you start your workday?
Checking emails and Slack channels
How do you spend most of the morning?
Either reading up on key industry reports, customer data, or potentially
responding to ad hoc requests
How does the morning end?
Daily stand-up
When do you take a lunch break?
About 12:30
What do you do first in the afternoon?
Meetings with stakeholders
How do you handle “fire drills” or other unplanned work?
Assess severity and then address based on the context
How do you spend the bulk of the afternoon?
In meetings
What do you do at the end of the workday?
Wrap up with focused work for a period of 1–2 hours
Do you work in the evening?
Almost always

Roadmaps and How to Say “No” 187
Key Insights
• A roadmap communicates what goals the product team is
working on now and planning to work on in the future.
• A roadmap is not a launch plan.
• Roadmaps are best managed in three time horizons: Now,
Next, and Later.
• Roadmaps should focus on desired outcomes organized
by themes, and not laundry lists of wish list features and
pet peeves.
• A product roadmap communicates the product strategy,
which is itself an expression of the organization’s larger
strategy.
• You may own an entire roadmap or just a tiny part of one.
• Roadmap planning requires rigorous, systematic prioritiza-
tion of ideas that may come from vision, users, data, and
colleagues.
• You’ll need to make a case for your priorities and obtain
buy-in for your roadmap.
• Roadmaps require constant care and feeding, and you need
to keep stakeholders abreast of updates and changes as
priorities evolve and external circumstances change.
• Practice saying no.
• The boss may still overrule you.
• It can be useful at times to be able to show your roadmap in
multiple ways, depending on who is asking for it.



CHAPTER 11
Chief
Information
Architect
The Head of Product’s Secret Sauce 190
Be a Boss 193
Selling Your Team’s Services Internally as a Product 196
Building Product Teams 199
Investing in Your Team 201
Someone Has to Lead—Why Not You? 203
Key Insights 203

190 Chapter 11
D
epending on the size of the product team and its position
in the organization, the leader of the team might have any
number of different titles: chief product officer, vice presi-
dent of product, director of product management, or even group
product manager. Sometimes the title is just head of product, leaving
the exact level ambiguous.
In some organizations the head of product or CPO has a design peer,
a Chief Experience Officer (CXO) or Chief Design Officer (CDO), or
Head of UX (or Design), but this structure is (sadly, for UXers) still
more the exception than the rule. More often, both UX and product
management ultimately roll up to be a head of product.
Thus, if you do choose to pursue a product management career
founded on your UX expertise, then the promotion ladder will
potentially take you to a product leadership role, where you may find
yourself (once again) managing designers alongside product manag-
ers and likely some other skill sets as well (data science and analysis,
customer success, maybe even some engineers).
The Head of Product’s Secret Sauce
When the internet first took off, the people doing what we now call
user experience strategy, research, and design were called information
architects. Over time, new roles and titles came along (interaction
designer, UX designer, product designer) and the role of an IA was
gradually reduced to either “figuring out the navigation” for websites
or limited to information-rich environments that needed the library-
science skills of taxonomy, ontology, synonym rings, and the rest.
But along the way, information architecture also reasserted itself as a
discipline in its own right with important things to say about notions
of space, embodiment, information, and wayfinding. As discussed in
earlier chapters, the IA practices of mapping systems to reveal their
concepts and meaning and providing a coherent picture and story
about what the team is actually building turn out to be crucial skills
to bring to bear in product management at every level.
Years ago, when I was working for one of my product mentors, Matte
Scheinker, in an attempt to reboot AOL (now finally absorbed into
Yahoo and sold off to private equity by Verizon), I told him I was

Chief Information Architect 191
surprised that we didn’t have any information architects on staff,
as it wasn’t even a job title in the HR system anymore.
Matte (pronounced “mott-ee”) turned to me and asked, “Well, how
many IAs does a company need?” So I thought about that question
before answering and then said, “At least one.”
This got me thinking that somebody in the company needs to be
the chief information architect to do the hard work of mapping the
problem/opportunity space and the meaning and purpose of the
product in that larger system.
There are many organizations where nobody does this work for the
product or portfolio as a whole, even if lots of really good UX design-
ers and PMs are thinking intelligently about the IA and structure
of their specific features and projects. If anyone is telling that larger
story, it tends to be the head of product (or sometimes, for sure, a
head of design).
Someone needs to take responsibility for the coherence of the prod-
uct at the highest level. Information architect and consultant Jorge
Arango put it this way in his Informed Life podcast in 2020:
1
Where within this [product management] framework is there
a place for looking after the coherence between those things?
Especially if they’re part of some kind of ecosystem or family of
products. Eventually those things need to cohere at some level . . . .
My favorite example of the lack of such a thing is Kindle. I’ve been
using Kindle for a while to read books, so I should be familiar
with it. And I use Kindle in three very different device platforms.
I have a dedicated Kindle reader. I have Kindle on my iOS devices,
iPad and iPhone. And I also use Kindle on my Mac, and I find
things like navigation structures to be different in all three.
This “decoherence” among versions of the same product is a conse-
quence of fragmented pressures from different platforms, tech stacks,
and user bases.
There are natural tensions even when trying to impose a consistent
paradigm across a family of related products. Individual teams will
object, saying “Yeah, but that doesn’t work for my device,” or, “But I
have reasons for this,” or “It’s always been this way on our subplat-
form. You bought us and now you’re trying to make us be part of you.”
1 “Christian Crumlish on Product Management” https://theinformed.life/
2020/03/01/episode-30-christian-crumlish/

192 Chapter 11
Where everything is constantly shifting, especially in a larger
organization, it’s almost impossible to impose coherence from the
top down, but a product leader can gradually bring a complex system
into harmony. As Dawn Russell, who is an information architect at
CVS Health, said:
I would argue decoherence is also born from org structure and
internal funding models, especially in companies/products
where many lines of business live under one brand. For example,
at CVS Health, we offer flu shots through both the pharmacy and
our MinuteClinic. Same shot, same topic, even same location,
but different lines of business. So without a chief architect that
“looks across” these lines of business to drive coherence, we’ve
ended up with two ways to schedule a flu shot on one domain,
placing the onus on the customer to navigate and understand.
It often seems that every big organization is literally either in the
process of becoming a little bit more decentralized or a little bit more
centralized, or it’s finished doing one of those things and it’s about
to start doing the other one. They never find the perfect amount of
decentralization and centralization, so you get matrix reporting.
People end up with both a boss and a practice leader, and during
reorgs they vibrate between reporting to one or the other primar-
ily. Unfortunately, this kind of organizational thrash also tends to
produce product experiences that are all over the map.
Ideally, you are shooting for a holistic UX instead of a unique experi-
ence for each expression of your product. That means that you don’t
do the UX of your Kindle on the Mac and the UX of your Kindle
on the Kindle and your UX of the Kindle on iOS, and the UX of the
Kindle on Android devices, and so on, each as separate exercises
managed by siloed teams.
Kindle should have one UX, and Kindle should have an information
architecture that is one big map. And then everything should be
some articulation of that or some expression of that. There will be
compromises, but there should always be a larger sense of unity and
cohesion. Without someone in product leadership focusing on this
goal and working toward it, drift is inevitable.

Chief Information Architect 193
Be a Boss
For years, UX fought for “a seat at the table,” or to be in the room
where it happens. Along the way, people started forming product
organizations, and it seemed that most UX jobs had a reporting struc-
ture that eventually reached someone in a product role. To get a seat at
the boss’s table, it could feel like you needed to be a product leader.
Now that is changing somewhat, to some extent, and in some con-
texts. There are design executives and organizations where product
and UX design sit together as peers at the very highest level of the
org chart, but in either scenario, all roles converge at the leadership
level. Whether you come in the door wearing a product hat or a
design badge, you sit down together and come to decisions about
product and organization strategy together around the same table.
You each bring your expertise and the ability of your team to deliver
to that table, but by the time you get there it might not matter as
much to you which door you came in.
Then again, in many organizations, the top dog in the shared space
of product and UX still has a product title. This is not the best reason
to choose product over design at the fork in your career road, but it is
a legitimate consideration. If your organization needs product leader-
ship, if it needs an information architect mapping and clarifying the
product roadmap, why shouldn’t that boss be you?
Just remember that once you climb that pinnacle, get a seat at the
table, and have a voice in the direction of your product, all the most
difficult decisions are going to come to your desk, and it’s going to
be you who is awake at 3 a.m. remembering problems nobody else is
worrying about (Figure 11.1).
FIGURE 11.1
Be careful what you
wish for! By the time
you become the
boss of product, you
inherit all the biggest
problems and all the
riskiest decisions.

194 Chapter 11
FROM THE TRENCHES . . .
LEARNING TO SPEAK EXECUTIVE
Harry Max is a leadership consultant who has guided many product
and UX leaders. He points out that designers are often not all that
great at communicating with executives.
“If you want to be taken seriously and you want a seat at the table and
you want to start dealing with executives, you have to start speaking
the language of business. You’ve got to talk about making money.
You’ve got to talk about saving money. You’ve got to talk about avoid-
ing unnecessary costs.”
You’ve got to talk about building brand, building market share,
hiring and retaining talent, and identifying, pursuing, and executing
goals and objectives. You’ve got to figure out how to make progress
day in and day out, period, and you really have to step outside your-
self and start looking at how you’re communicating.
“It starts with speaking the language of the people that you’re
interacting with. And if you’re doing it in a for-profit environment
and you’re doing it in a business, you really have to use the language
of business. And if you’re doing it in a civic-oriented environment,
you’ve got to start using the language of policy, the language of
constituents.
“You have to get inside the head of the people. UX people often speak
the language of design and visuals and information architecture and
usability. Leaders are trying to figure out how to steer an organiza-
tion in a direction. They’re responsible for people, they’re responsible
for projects, and they’re responsible for money. They’ve got lots of
constituents, whether they’re investors or bankers or whoever.
“Your listening skills have to shift. You’ll have to discern things at a
higher level of abstraction. You have to get beyond active listening
and move into what I characterize as deep listening.

Chief Information Architect 195
“The higher you go, the more the people you’re communicating with
will work to move a conversation forward, because they are discovering
what they want to learn as you’re talking. This means that when they’re
asking you questions, you have to answer the questions they’re asking,
not the ones you were trying to answer yourself. You’re answering
very precisely, and you’re anticipating to some extent where they might
want to go so that you can be efficient about helping them get there, but
you’re not telling stories!
“You’re not giving these long preambles and you’re not giving a lot of
excuses and it’s not because they don’t want to hear excuses, which
they don’t, but it has to do with the fact that what they’re really trying
to do is get to something that’s meaningful and interesting. That helps
move the conversation forward for them.
“So precision questioning and answering and deep listening are
critical, too. I think it’s especially true of designers who are interested
in pursuing more responsibility and higher level goals, because the
expectation is already there that they’re good at it. And if they don’t
do it, they’re being downgraded for it.
“It’s going to boil down to: Are you in a position to make clear the
requests, and accept and deliver on agreements that you’ve made? Can
you draw a through-line from a thought to a conversation to an action,
to a decision, to a request, to an agreement? Do you understand the
outcome frame around that? That is, what does success actually look
like and how do you clarify it for yourself and for others?
“How do you avoid tacit agreements? ‘Hey, I realized that when we
were talking about this, that, you know, you asked me to do some-
thing and I needed time to think about it, but I just realized that you
probably left with the impression that I’m actually going to do this,
and I don’t even know when you want it done.’”

196 Chapter 11
Selling Your Team’s Services Internally
as a Product
One of the most reliable forms of advice an experienced practitioner
can give an up-and-coming UXer is to apply their user-centered
research and design “superpowers” to more problems than just the
design of interfaces and software product experiences in general.
As you progress in this world of collaborative technology develop-
ment, you will notice along the way that the difference between
success and failure often has a lot more to do with “soft skills,” team
performance, and interpersonal dynamics than the tech stack or
navigation paradigm you choose.
UX SUPERPOWER ALERT
WHEN THE PRODUCT IS INNOVATION ITSELF
If you’ve ever had to sell UX in an organization new to it or re-
luctant to embrace it, then you’ve seen that arrogant evangelism
backfires, but that deeply understanding the needs of your users,
er, colleagues, reflecting on the “usability” of your deliverables
and communications, and crafting an experience (of working with
you) that delights, relieves pain, and solves real problems is the
path to success.
The same “advice” trick applies to job searches and getting bet-
ter at interviewing. Take all your abilities to understand people’s
needs, motivations, worries and fears, and to shape experiences
designed to address those needs and apply them to the experi-
ence of hiring you. Lather, rinse, repeat.
So it is with product management, where the disciplines of
obsessing intensely about the unmet needs and aspirations
of your “customer,” crafting a solution that addressed the
demands of a “market,” and packaging your services as a
“product” can be turned to other goals beyond enticing
people to complete transactions.
The state of California’s Office of Digital Innovation, for example,
does build and ship digital software products in the sense that
most people mean. For example, the team built the state’s pandemic
response website (covid19.ca.gov), shown in Figure 11.2, a new
site for the state’s cannabis licensing authorities (cannabis.ca.gov),
and another special site to help the state’s public conserve water
(drought.ca.gov).

Chief Information Architect 197
FIGURE 11. 2
California’s Office of Digital
Innovation (ODI) spun up the
covid19.ca.gov site in response
to the pandemic to provide the
state’s public and government
officials with a single reliable
source of current guidance and
information.

198 Chapter 11
Those websites can be thought of as products in a more-or-less-
traditional sense, despite the lack of any commercial transactions or
consumer goals (though the cannabis site will enable license applica-
tions). The deeper mission of the innovation team is to help enable
all of the state’s agencies to produce highly performant, very usable
websites that communicate in plain language and make data open
and accessible.
For this goal, the “product” is more a set of beneficial practices and
some tools and services (such as a design system and consulting
resources), and the “customers” are colleagues in adjacent state agen-
cies. Here again, the product management’s deep curiosity about the
needs of the person they are trying to serve, rapid iteration through a
build/measure/learn cycle, and thoughtful communication, illus-
tration, and storytelling enable them to meet the demands of this
internal “market.”
Frankly, all teams need to do a certain amount of this, persuasion of
other teams and leaders as to the value of their skills and talents and
offerings. It’s just that the UX and product superpowers are particu-
larly helpful when you train the lens on your surroundings as well as
your external markets.
Overcommunicate Deliberately
Fundamentally, successful alignment within a larger organization
comes down to communication, making sure that the work your
team does is “legible” (clear to read, and easy to understand), always
staying ahead of changing circumstances to keep expectations cur-
rent, and overcommunicating wherever possible.
For example, if you lead a product team, you should plan a regular
cadence of sharing updates on the product roadmap, showcases
of the work currently underway, and retrospective analyses of the
outcomes from what was shipped in the past.
Partner with the Voice of the Customer
It’s shocking how many organizations keep their customers at arm’s
length. Even when there are teams dedicated to supporting or other-
wise interacting with customers, they are often siloed off away from
the rest of the organization and treated more like a cost center than
as an invaluable source of research, let alone the external nervous
system of the org itself.

Chief Information Architect 199
Years ago, Craig Newmark, founder of Craigslist, made a point of
focusing on customer support instead of making himself CEO of
his own business. He made a strong case that the only way for a
collective entity such as a business or enterprise to actually learn
and evolve is to channel feedback from external signals directly to
the decision-making center. He championed empowering customer
support professionals to report what they were hearing and to
propose solutions.
Whatever the prevailing culture you find yourself in, part of your mis-
sion will be to forge ties with customer support, customer success, and
community managers. These people can offer you solid gold insights
into what your customers and larger community of supporters want,
need, talk about, complain about, love, hate, and trend toward.
Any product success I’ve ever had has derived at least in part from
close collaboration with customer support and community manag-
ers, leveraging their access and analyses to form a deeper and richer
picture of where the product needs to go, and even working directly
with customers in the product’s community, gathering their wishes
and feedback, sharing early design sketches with them, recruiting
beta testers, and enlisting supporters to help spread the word.
Building Product Teams
Once you’re running a product team, you’re in the business of hiring
and building the strengths of that team. Creating a strong product
organization starts with a commitment from the top, and now this
will mean you.
Change is never easy and new habits cause friction when they clash
with comforting older customs. Your executive championship of the
product mindset will be a necessary, but not sufficient, ingredient in
transforming your business and empowering your product people.
Define the skills your product team needs to bring to bear, make
some skills histograms (as explained in Chapter 3, “UX Skills That
Carry Over”), and start recruiting to hire people who can help your
team level up in the critical areas where you are not collectively
strong enough yet. Also, look for the product people who are cur-
rently in other roles. Some will be participatory allies and part of
the product culture you are hoping to grow, and others may be great
candidates to move over to the product track under a leader who can
help mentor someone through such a change.

200 Chapter 11
Enable Transitions
When you are growing a product team out of the “soil” of your
existing staff, you will want to identify people who show the sort of
aptitude and instincts discussed throughout this book. They may be
engineers, designers, marketers, business analysts, project managers,
sales people, customer support staff, or really anyone.
Make it clear that you are building a product practice, and that it
will involve some hiring. Explain that people in other roles will also
be involved, as the entire enterprise takes on the habits of a product
organization. Finally, be sure to welcome people formally transition-
ing into product management roles from their existing jobs and
facilitate this by providing training, coaching, and mentorship.
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A VP OF PRODUCT
Benoît des Ligneris, Vice President of Product at Woolf
Share anything else that might help describe the environment in which you
practice product management.
Hyper-growth industry with lots of innovation and competition.
How do you spend the early morning?
Waking up with the sun, meditating 20 minutes, chores, strength training/
bike ride/run, walk 30–45 minutes, and then work from home.
How do you start your workday?
By a 30-minute walk outside to plan my day and solve problems or
define goals.
How do you spend most of the morning?
I do not have a typical morning! I have lots of meetings and try to get them
early in the week.
Monday–Tuesday morning is when I tend to have my key meetings outside
of the product team.
Wednesday is a “no meeting” day: only craft-based activities (to become a
better PM, not to PM something . . . ) in the morning.
Thursday: Recruiting and peers.
Friday: This is when I have my meeting with senior leadership, I try to focus
on this.
How does the morning end?
Noon. I have it in my agenda: no meeting during lunch time. Especially work-
ing from home, it is important to have boundaries and key rituals in place.
Most of the time, this is a meeting with someone from my team. I like the idea
to wish folks “bon appétit” and share some detail about our daily lives.

Chief Information Architect 201
When do you take a lunch break?
Noon. I typically spend 30 minutes to eat and then go for a walk outside
(whether -30 C or +45) with my wife: Non-negotiable “us time.”
What do you do first in the afternoon?
Lots of key meetings with other teams and customer sessions tend to start
at 1 p.m. sharp. Everyone is quite productive after lunch.
How do you handle “fire drills” or other unplanned work?
My limits for a productive Monday are between 7–12 meetings as I try
to gather key information for the week. Plus, I try to book all my extra
meetings on Monday so that I can organize my week around this new infor-
mation. The other days, my schedule is lighter with 4–8 meetings maximum.
Because Wednesday is a “no meeting day,” it nicely cuts the week in half
and helps create some slack in my schedule.
How do you spend the bulk of the afternoon?
Being a morning person, I am less productive in the afternoon, and I tend
to keep it for the more tedious work—work that is automatic, or that I enjoy
less, in particular:
• reporting
• status update
• checking KPI
• updating documents/iterating on feedback
What do you do at the end of the workday?
I also do my best to stop at 5 p.m. sharp. It does not happen all the time as
lots of candid conversations tend to happen at the end of the workdays—
especially for my reports. Lots of the emergencies also require a kind of
end-of-day check-in to align for the next day. Those are the two occasions I
allow myself to work past 5 p.m.
Do you work in the evening?
Occasionally.
Investing in Your Team
You should constantly look for ways to develop your team’s prod-
uct craft. Product people need to master the skills and techniques
discussed throughout this book, and you need to help them do that.
Product leadership needs to put in place the educational opportunities
and events, the training programs, and an operation that provides
career growth and professional development for product practitioners.
Product training should be offered to any practitioner who is inter-
ested, not just to people with product manager job titles. The goal
is to nurture and validate a product mindset in any role, across the
entire organization (Figure 11.3).

202 Chapter 11
FIGURE 11.3
Atlassian puts on an internal product craft conference annually to train product
people and build the product practice community across the company.
Cross-Training for Increased Fitness
A reliable way to broaden and strengthen product skills across your
org is through cross-training. This depends on having at least one
person who has mastered the skill that others are hoping to develop.
Let’s take, for example, the practice of tracking product analytical
data, such as retention and working systematically to improve it.
This proficiency involves a handful of techniques and skills that can
be learned, among them:
• Capturing valid meaningful data
• Manipulating charts and graphs to analyze the data
• Engaging in discovery to understand what is going on with
customers that might explain the data
• Developing hypotheses about what might improve the
experience
• Prioritizing experiments to test these hypotheses
• Learning from the outcomes of experiments and feeding this
learning back into the discovery process
The best way to cross-train a product person who is more junior or
who has less experience with these activities is to pair them with a
senior product person who excels at these things. The key part is that
the person who is learning does the work. The person who has the
wisdom and experience provides coaching, guidance, and feedback.

Chief Information Architect 203
In the short term, these tasks will take a bit longer than if they were
assigned to the experienced hand, but the benefit in distributing
this expertise more widely across the team outweighs this cost, and
the more that cross-training goes on, the more supple and agile the
product team will be—more able to flex, recombine, and adapt to
handle changing circumstances.
Someone Has to Lead—Why Not You?
Remember, whatever path you decide is right for you, every effort
you’re part of is going to need someone to be that chief information
architect, whether that’s the head of product, the head of product’s
design right-hand thought partner, or the head of design. It all comes
together at the top.
Key Insights
• Information architecture can be a unique superpower for a
product lead.
• Whether you become a PM or stay a UX designer in a prod-
uct world, you can still get a seat at the table.
• As a product leader, one of your products is your team—its
customers are your colleagues, and its market is your
organization.
• Make sure that your work is legible and you
overcommunicate.
• Product leadership means building the scaffolding for the
development of more product talent.
• Be a boss.



205
INDEX
#
7 Cups
breaking even, experiments in
revenue models, 133–145
crawling through glass, 75
epilogue to break-even story, 181–182
hypothesis and experiment, 110
onboarding to, 138–139, 142
“44 Signs You Are Becoming a Product
Manager” (Cutler), 21–23
100x Group, 147
A
A/A testing, 117
A/B testing, 108, 116–120
control and variant, 121
impact, 117–118
learning, 118
at Netflix, 114
problems with tests, 119–120
scheduling, 116
stacking, 118–119
statistical significance, 117
unsuitability for enterprise
contexts, 120
variations on, 121–122
A/B/C testing, 121
Aardvark, 123
AARRR, 96
abbreviated funnels, 94
acquisition, 96, 97
activation, 96, 98–99
active users, 97, 98–99
Agile principles and practices, 55, 56
“agilefall,” 56
agreements
tacit, 195
working, 156
Aha!, product operations tool, 184–185
Airtable tool, 89–90, 114, 115
Allison, Mose, 164
Amazon
Prime, revenue model, 132, 133
Wizard of Oz testing, 123
ambition, as reason to become a PM, 20
Amplitude analytics package, 116
analytics. See product analytics
annual planning, 54–55
AOL, and MBA requirement, 8
Apple computer, and design thinking, 14
Applytics analytics package, 116
Arango, Jorge, 191
Atlassian, 202
Aurora Solar, 105
Avshalomov, Jesse, 115
awareness, 96, 97
B
backlog, grooming, 56–57
the bad, product/UX relationships,
155–156
Bastow, Janna, 184
Baum, Chris, xvii
Bergstrom, Lukas, 104
beta programs, 120, 125
Blend, 83, 84
blockers, 56
Boersma, Peter, 33
Bot Sentinel, 136–137
bounce, 98

206 Index
breaking even, 131, 133–135, 143,
144–145, 181–182
Breaking into Product Management (Kao), 83
broken glass (hard test), 120, 124.
See also crawling through glass
Brunckhorst, Janet, 105
bucket testing, 108, 116. See also A/B
testing
buggy software, 60–61
Build, Measure, Learn cycle, 12–13, 55,
168, 198
build phase of development, and
experimentation, 109
bullying, and help from 7 Cups, 134
burndown charts, 57–58
business
language of, 194–195
multiple lines of, 145
business managers, 6–8
business of product, 69–86
building sustainable value, 70
business operations, 81–82
business-to-business (B2B) products, 83
customer obsession, 79–80
financial business skills, 82–83
finding product-market fit, 74–77
go-to-market plan, 77–79
launching vs. optimizing, 80–81
targeting a market, 71–74
thinking of the market, 70–71
typical day of enterprise PM, 84–85
business operations, 81–82
business-to-business (B2B)
A/B tests in enterprise contexts, 120
customers and users, 83, 84
revenue models, 131
business-to-business-to-consumer
(B2B2C), 83
business-to-consumer (B2C), 83
business-to-government (B2G), 83
C
cadences, 53–56
Cagan, Marty, 11–12
California’s Office of Digital Innovation,
196–198
cannabis website, 196, 198
career reasons to become a PM, 19–20
Cartesian plot, for prioritizing road-
map, 174–175
centralization and decentralization in
organization, 192
CEOs
compared with product managers, 7
input on roadmap, 183–184
language of executives, 194–195
chief information architect, 189–204
be the boss, 193, 203
building product teams, 199–200
coherence across product family,
190–192
cross-training, 202–203
executive language, 194–195
investing in the team, 201–203
selling team services internally as a
product, 196–199
typical day of VP of Product, 200–201
UX skill of information architecture,
43–45
chief product officer (CPO), 190
Chisa, Ellen, 183
Christensen, Clay, 146
churn, 98
Cleveland, Dirk, 152
CloudOn, 3, 73, 78–79
co-design (co-creation) session, 67
coefficient of virality, 102–103
Coforma, 66
coherence across product family,
190–192

Index 207
collaboration, coordination, and
communication, in product/UX
relationships, 161
communication frameworks, 178
communication in selling team services
internally, 198
community managers, collaboration
with, 199
company objectives on roadmap,
169–170
concept models, as posters, 44
concierge features, 122
concierge test, 120, 122
confidence, in RICE framework, 178
connecting, as trait of PMs, 15
Connor, Adam, 153
consensus, rough, 156
conversions, funnel tracking, 94
Cornell, Heather, 110
Cornett, Larry, xviii, 19
courage, as trait of PMs, 15
Craigslist, 199
crawling through glass, 75, 134. See also
broken glass (hard test)
creative artists, 14
cross-training, 202–203
cultural divides, 63
curiosity, as trait of PMs, 15
Curry, Michael, 147–148
customer, compared with user, 132
customer lifecycle, 96. See also growing
the user base
customer obsession, 79–80
customer satisfaction, 45–46
customer support, collaboration with, 199
customers’ voice, partnering with,
198–199
Cutler, John, 21
CVS Health, 192
D
daily stand-up, 53
dark metrics, 104
data, living in, 26, 88–90
instrumentation as part of features, 90
using SQL, 89–90
data analysis
cautions on, 103–104
as task of PM, 25–26, 28, 36, 49, 88
data-driven design, 47
data-informed design, 47–48
DAU (daily active users), 98
day in life of PMs, 27–29, 36, 49
of agency PM, 66–67
of enterprise PM, 84–85
of fintech PM, 147–148
of growth-stage PM, 105
of SaaS PM, 186
of start-up PM, 126–127
of VP of Product, 200–201
de-risking, 112
decentralization and centralization in
organization, 192
decision making, 32–34
decision to delay, 34
decoherence, 191–192
demo day, 61
design, engineering meaning, 63
design thinking, 14
directory, as revenue generating experi-
ment, 140–141
disagree and commit, 135
document editor on iPad, 73, 78–79, 124
dogfooding test, 120, 124
donations, as revenue generating
experiment, 135–137
“done,” definition of, 60–61
donuts, bringing, 64

208 Index
drop-offs, investigating, 92, 93
Dropbox, 35, 73
Duran, Nicholas, 126–127
E
EasyRetro, 62
edge cases, 60
effort vs. impact, on roadmap, 172–173,
174–177
Eisenhower matrix, on roadmap,
173–174, 176
email promotional message, 73, 78–79, 124
engaged users, 99
engineer wrangling, 51–68
cadences, 53–56
definition of “done,” 60–61
estimation and negotiation, 65–66
iterative process improvement
through retrospectives, 62–63
keeping teams aligned, 52–60
respect, and getting results from
engineers, 63–65
sprint planning, 56–57
sprints, during, 57–60
typical day of agency PM, 66–67
engineering, relationship with product
management and research and
design, 153
engineering managers, 9–11
enterprise licenses, revenue model, 132
estimation, by engineers, 65–66
evolving interests as reason to become
PM, 22–24
experimental explorers, 11–13
experimentation. See also testing
hypotheses with experiments
proposing and prioritizing, 111–115
ranking and scoring, 114–115
reducing risk as goal, 112–113
role in phases of development, 109
“Volunteer as a Listener,” 110
as way of life, 108
experiments
process, 120, 126
sales, 120, 125
experiments for generating revenue
donations, 135–137
paid therapy, 141–142
therapist directory, 140–141
therapy, 143
upgrades, 137–139
white label, 139–140
F
fake door test, 120, 124
feature factories, 156
features, not in roadmap, 168
financial business skills, 82–83
“fire drills,” 85, 105, 127, 148, 186, 201
fix phase of development, and experi-
mentation, 109
Flow Commerce, Inc., 186
free product, revenue model, 132
freemium paywall, revenue model, 132,
137, 141
funnel optimization, 90–95, 143
abbreviated, 94
analyzing, 91–92
caution, 95
investigating drop-offs, 92, 93
monitoring trends over time, 93–94
origin of name, 91
funnels
AARRR as long-scale, 97
compared with retention, 101

Index 209
G
Gantt charts, 165
general managers, 8
Gilad, Itamar, 121
Giraldo-Wingler, Ana, 66–67
glass
broken glass (hard test), 120, 124
crawling through glass, 75, 134
go-to-market plan, 77–79
goals on roadmap, 169
the good, product/UX relationships, 155
good enough, 61
Google
Associate Product Manager
program, 10
dogfooding with Gmail and Google
Plus, 124
Google Analytics, 116
Gothelf, Jeff, 13
grooming the backlog, 56–57
growing the user base, 96–103
acquisition, 97
activation, 98–99
awareness, 97
referral, 102–103
retention, 99–102, 143
revenue, 97, 103
growth hackers, 95
growth metrics, 95
growth product managers, 95
growth stage (series B) start-up, 105
Gupta, Jeewant Singh, 152, 154
H
hard test (broken glass), 120, 124
head of product, 5
Headspace (app), 137
hiring for product team, 200
histogram, skills, 32, 37–43, 150–151
Hoffman, Reid, 34, 61
holdover (holdback) test, 120, 125
How Not to Be Viral (Marks), 103
human-driven service, concierge
experiment as, 122
hypotheses. See also testing hypotheses
with experiments
defined, 108, 109, 111
testing with experiments, 111–115
“Volunteer as a Listener,” 110
I
idea validation, 121
impact, in A/B testing, 117–118
impact vs. effort, on roadmap, 172–173,
174–177
important vs. urgent, on roadmap,
173–174
information architect. See also chief
information architect
historical title, 190
information architecture, 43–45
innovation, selling team services,
196–198
innovator’s dilemma, 146
Inspired (Cagan), 11
instrumentation, as part of features, 90
internal “market,” selling team services
to, 196–199
interpersonal dynamics, 24, 82, 196
interview, for technical PM, 10
Iouguina, Alëna, 46
iPad, document editor on, 73, 78–79, 124
iterative design, 47–48
iterative process improvement, 62–63
Ive, Jonathan, 14

210 Index
J
Jira, 25, 57, 58
job description of PM, 24–26
Jobs, Steve, 14
Johnson, Ian, 186
K
Kanban, 58–60
Kao, Clement, 8, 26, 34, 83, 84–85, 120
Kerwin, Tom, 122, 123, 125
Kindle, 191, 192
L
language of executives (and business
and policy), 194–195
Lash, Jeff, xvii
Later items on roadmap, 53, 168, 181
launch plan, 77–78
as opposed to roadmap, 12, 78, 165,
166, 180
launching vs. optimizing, 80–81
leadership. See also chief information
architect; product management
leading through influence, 48–49
titles of chief product officer (CPO), 190
“lean” product management, 12–13, 14, 55
The Lean Startup (Ries), 12
learning
in A/B testing, 118
and iteration cycle, 12–13
LeMay, Matt, 4, 26, 33, 35, 72, 88, 155,
178, 182
Levi Strauss strategy, 83
lifecycle of product, and revenue, 131,
145–147
Ligneris, Benoît des, 200
line drawn, between product and UX,
152–154
Listener, Volunteer as a, 110
listening skills, 194–195
loss-leader strategy for market penetra-
tion, 133
M
magic square, 174
Malone, Erin, xvii
maps, as posters, 44
market
in business of product, 70–71
loss-leader strategy, 133
marketing managers, 8–9
Marks, Kevin, 103
MAU (monthly active users), 98
Max, Harry, 194–195
Mayer, Marissa, 10
MBA degrees, 8
McClure, Dave, 96
Mechanical Turk, 122
meetings
co-design (co-creation) session, 67
retrospective, 62–63
with stakeholders, 67
as task of PM, 49
in typical day of PM, 28, 49, 67, 84,
105, 148, 186, 200–201
metrics, dark, and proxy, 104
Mironov, Rich, 12
Mixpanel analytics package, 116
money, 129–148
breaking even, 131, 133–135, 143,
144–145, 181–182
experiments. See experiments for
generating revenue
importance of money, 147
multiple lines of business, 145
profit and loss, 130–131

Index 211
Ramen profitable, 144–145
revenue lifecycles, 131, 145–147
revenue models, 131–133
typical day of fintech PM, 147–148
monthly roadmap review, 53–54, 180
multiple lines of business, 145
multivariate testing, 108, 116, 121–122
N
negotiation with engineers, 65
Netflix
A/B testing at scale, 114
revenue model, 131–132, 133
Newmark, Craig, 199
Next items on roadmap, 53, 167, 181
Nishihara, Caio B., 158
“no,” and the art of saying it, 182–185
North Star metrics, 109
Norton, Ken, 28, 64
Now items on roadmap, 53, 166, 180
numerical analysis, as task of PM,
25–26, 28, 36, 49
sizing a market, 72
O
OKRs (Objectives and Key Results), 170
onboarding to 7 Cups, 138–139, 142
online products, as services, 6
online shopping cart, in funnel optimi-
zation, 93
Optimizely tool, 116
optimizing a product, in revenue
lifecycle, 131, 146
optimizing vs. launching, 80–81
org chart, 157–158
Ortiz, Eduardo F., 152
outcomes on roadmap, 12, 168–169
overinterpretation, in A/B tests, 119
ownership
of product, 4–5
of product, profit and loss, 82
of roadmap, 170–171
P
Pagels-Minor, B., 2, 130, 133
paid therapy, as revenue generating
experiment, 141–142
pandemic response website, 196–198
partial rollouts, 120, 124–125
perfectionism, paralysis of, 61
Phan, Hà, 81
pirate mnemonic, AARRR, 96
pitch provocation, 125
PM, as abbreviation for product
manager, 4
policy, language of, 194
“polishing a local maximum,” 117, 118, 119
posters of maps and concept models, 44
postmortems, 62
pretotypes test, 120, 123
primary investigator, 5
prioritization of experiments, 111–115, 119
prioritization on roadmap, 171–178
Eisenhower matrix, 173–174, 176
frameworks, 172–173, 177–178
impact vs. effort, 172–173, 174–177
important vs. urgent, 173–174
methods, 172
protecting by saying “no,” 182–185
RICE framework, 172–173, 178
T-shirt sizing, 172, 177
process experiments, 120, 126
Procore Technologies, 160
ProdPad, product operations tool, 167,
178, 184–185
product, meaning of, xvi

212 Index
product analytics, 87–106
cautions, 103–104
funnel optimization, 90–95. See also
funnel optimization
growing the user base, 96–103.
See also growing the user base
growth metrics, 95
living in the data, 88–90
typical day of growth-stage PM, 105
product hooks (instrumentation), 90
product management
history of profession, 5–6, 11
relationship with engineering and
research and design, 153
responsibility for coherence, 190–192
responsibility for value, 2, 15, 70, 83
responsibility for “what,” 150
skills overlap with UX. See UX skills
overlap
titles of leader, 190
product manager role, transitioning
into, 17–30
ambition, 20
business operations, 81–82
career move from UX, caveat on sug-
gestions, 158
as chief information architect, 193, 203
deciding not to be a PM, 29–30
evolving interests, 22–24
job description, 24–26
professional and career reasons,
19–20
reasons to be a product manager, 18
signs of becoming a “real” PM, 21–23
typical day, 27–29
product managers
as business managers, 6–8
compared with product owners, 4–5
compared with project managers, 4
compared with UX designers, 34–36
as creative artists, 14
as decision makers, 32–34
as engineering managers, 9–11
as experimental explorers, 11–13
as hybrids, dual role, 159
as marketing managers, 8–9
personality traits of, 15, 35
skills of. See UX skills overlap
tasks performed by, 15, 26, 36, 49.
See also meetings; numerical
analysis; writing
product-market fit, 74–77
lousy product, but wanted, 75
zeroing in on, 76–77
product/market fit engine, 76–77
product marketing, 71, 97
product marketing managers, 8–9
product operations (product ops),
170–171
product operations tool, 184–185
product owners, 4–5
product revenue lifecycle, 131, 145–147
product strategy on roadmap, 168–171
company objectives, 169–170
outcomes, 168–169
ownership of roadmap, 170–171
themes, 169
product teams
building, 199–200
investing with training, 201–203
selling services internally as product,
196–199
product/UX relationships, 149–162
career move from UX to product, 158
collaboration, coordination, and
communication, 161
drawing the line, 152–154
the good, the bad, and the ugly,
154–157
hybrid dual role, 159

Index 213
in the org chart, 157–158
overlap of skills and conflicts, 150–152
service design, 160
production fires. See “fire drills”
professional reasons to become a PM,
19–20
profit and loss (P&L)
ownership of product, 82
in product’s lifecycle, 130–131
program management, 81
program managers, 7
project management, 81
project management tools, 57–59
project managers, 4
prototypes, 123
proxy metrics, 104
Psychology Today (magazine), 140–141
Q
qualitative research, 74
quarterly planning, 54
questions
asking smart ones, 65
precision, in language of executives,
195
R
Ramen profitable, 144–145
Ramirez, Kristen, 160
reach, in RICE framework, 178
Redfern, Joff, 8
referral, 96, 102–103
release plans
as opposed to roadmap, 12, 165–166,
168, 180, 185
waiting too long, 34
research
qualitative, 74
in targeting a market, 72
research and design, relationship with
product management and engi-
neering, 153
research/launch cycle, 46
respect, giving to and earning from
engineers, 63–65
retention, 96, 99–102, 143
retrospective meetings, 62–63
return on investment (ROI), in UX
design, 130
revenue. See also money
in customer lifecycle, 96, 97, 103
lifecycle of product, 131, 145–147
models, 131–133
RICE (reach, impact, confidence, and
effort) framework, 172–173, 178
Ries, Eric, 12
roadmaps, 163–187
art of saying “no,” 182–185
company objectives, 169–170
defined, 164–165
epilogue to “break-even” story,
181–182
expectations management, 180–181
horizons: Now, Next, Later, 12, 53,
166–168, 180–181
monthly review, 53–54, 180
as opposed to launch plans, 12, 78,
165, 166, 180
outcomes, 12, 168–169
ownership of, 170–171
populating and maintaining, 179–181
prioritization, 171–178. See also
prioritization on roadmap
product strategy, 168–171
themes and goals, 169
typical day of SaaS PM, 186
rough consensus, 156
Rumsey, Ryan, 125, 126
Russell, Dawn, 192

214 Index
S
Saez, Andrea, 178
SAFe
® 
(Scaled Agile Framework
® 
for
enterprise), 56
sales experiments, 120, 125
sales promises of product features, 140
Savoia, Alberto, 123
scheduling, in A/B testing, 116
Scheinker, Matte, 8, 190–191
Scotty’s estimates, 66
scrum rituals, 53
Seiden, Josh, 13
service design, 160
sign-up process
acquisition step, 97
in funnel optimization, 92
in retention, 101
signs of becoming a “real” PM, 21–23
skills histogram, 32, 37–43, 150–151
Smartsheet template, 166
smoke jumping, 12
smoke testing, 123
smokescreen test, 73, 78–79, 120, 123–124
social engineering, 135
software as a service (SaaS), 6, 131, 139
software development lifecycle (SDLC)
processes, 80
split testing, 108, 116. See also A/B testing
sprint
during, 57–60
planning, 56–57
review, 66–67
with scrum rituals, 53
SQL (Structured Query Language),
89–90
stacking, in A/B testing, 118–119
stakeholders
management of, 82, 165, 172
meetings with, 67
saying “no” to, 183
statistical significance, in A/B testing, 117
streaming entertainment services,
131–132
subscriptions, to generate revenue, 132,
137–139
sunsetting (shutting down) a product,
131, 146–147
Superhuman, email product, 76–77
sustainable value, 70
sustaining a product, in revenue
lifecycle, 131, 146
sustaining value, 2
Suvaun, 126
systems thinking, for problem solving, 93
T
T-shirt sizing, for prioritizing roadmap,
172, 177
tacit agreements, 195
target market, 71–74
gauging interest, 73–74
sizing a market, 71–73
teams. See product teams
“technical design,” of engineers, 63
technical PM interviews, 10
technical product managers, 9–10
testing hypotheses with experiments,
107–128
A/B test, how to run, 116–120. See also
A/B testing
build, fix, and tune, 109
experimentation as way of life, 108
experiments, proposing and prioritiz-
ing, 111–115
hypotheses defined, 108, 109, 111
other kinds of tests. See testing types
typical day of start-up PM, 126–127

Index 215
Testing Product Ideas Handbook (Gilad), 121
testing types, 120–126
A/B tests. See A/B testing
beta programs, 125
broken glass (hard test), 124
concierge, 122
dogfooding, 124
fake door, 124
holdover (holdback), 125
multivariate, 108, 116, 121–122
partial rollouts, 124–125
pretotypes, 123
process experiments, 126
sales experiments, 125
smokescreen, 73, 78–79, 123–124
variations on A/B tests, 121–122
Wizard of Oz, 122–123
themes on roadmap, 169
therapist directory, as revenue generat-
ing experiment, 140–141
therapy, as revenue generating experi-
ment, 141–142, 143
toxic environments, 156–157
tracking tools, for testing insights, 114
training team members, 201–203
transitions of team members, 200
Trello, 59
trends, monitoring over time, 93–94
tune phase of development, and experi-
mentation, 109
U
the ugly, product/UX relationships, 155,
156–157
universities and colleges, and white
label product, 139–140
unplanned work: “fire drills,” 85, 105,
127, 148, 186, 201
unsustainable value, 70
upgrades, as revenue generating experi-
ment, 137–139
urgent vs. important, on roadmap,
173–174
user base. See growing the user base
user research, 45–46, 73
users
active, 97, 98–99
in business-to-business (B2B) prod-
ucts, 83, 84
compared with customers, 132
engaged, 99
UX design, return on investment (ROI)
in, 130
UX designers. See also product/UX
relationships
personality traits of, compared with
PM, 35
responsibility for “how,” 150
tasks of, compared with PM, 26, 36, 49
understanding PM job, 29–30
UX skills overlap, 31–50
customer satisfaction and user
research, 45–46
day-to-day work, 36, 49
how PM differs from UX, 32–36
information architecture, 43–45
leading through influence, 48–49
skills histogram, 32, 37–43, 150–151
solving problems through data-
informed design, 47–48
V
validation methods, 121
value
defined, 3
product management responsibility
for, 2, 15, 70, 83
variations on A/B tests, 120, 121–122
Venn diagram of overlap between
product and UX, 151

216 Index
venture capitalists, 134–135
“viral” as metaphor, 103
viral coefficient, 102–103
Vohra, Rahul, 76–77
“Volunteer as a Listener,” 110
W
water conservation website, 196
WAU (weeky active users), 98
websites of innovation, 196–198
weekly retention analysis, 100
white label, as revenue generating
experiment, 139–140
Whysel, Noreen, 82
Williams, Maisie, 134
Wizard of Oz test, 120, 122–123
Woolf, 200
Word on the iPad, 73, 78–79, 124
working agreements, 156
writing, as task of PM, 25, 36, 49
Wroblewski, Luke, 19
Y
Yahoo
Developer Network, concept model
as poster, 44
producers, 11
product team promotions, 19
user experience design at, xvii–xviii
YCombinator, 75, 133
yearly planning, 54–55
Z
Zappos, Wizard of Oz testing, 123
Zaveri, Jay, 3, 73, 78–79, 124

217
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
S
o many people have helped me both literally write this book
and also to develop the material over the past several years.
Both one-on-one chats and threaded conversations in the
Design in Product community helped persuade me that a book
like this could reach a growing cohort of product-curious UXers,
design-sensitive product managers, and product leaders with a firm
foundation in user-centered research and design.
To start with, I have been blessed with some stellar product mentors,
advisors, wise compadres, and sounding boards over the years, espe-
cially Christina Wodtke, Matte Scheinker, Jay Zaveri, Rich Mironov,
Laura Klein, Ellen Chisa, Matt LeMay, Hà Phan, Tom Kerwin, and
Angelica Quirarte. Ken Norton has been especially kind to me at
several key junctures in my career path.
A cluster of folks who opened doors for me or shaped my thinking
along the way (Erin Malone, Dorelle Rabinowitz, Larry Cornett, Bryce
Glass, Kent Brewster, Nam Nguyen, Havi Hoffman, Laurie Voss, and
others I am no doubt forgetting) came into my life through Yahoo, and
we recently lost a giant among that cohort, the legendary Bill W. Scott.
He was a mentor and a friend and the internet will miss him.
Jeff Lash, Chris Baum, Jeff Gothelf, and Josh Seiden all helped
at critical moments to open up my development into a product
management leader.
Some of the above folks, along with many others, made their time
available to me for one or more interviews, or provided an example
of a day in the life of a product manager, including Bibiana Nunes,
Noreen Whysel, Peter Boersma, Madonnalisa Chan, Dawn Russell,
Alëna Iouguina, Clement Kao, Marvin Cheung, Ana Giraldo-Wingler,
Harry Max, B. Pagels-Minor, Kristen Ramirez, Sara Menefee, Brent
Palmer, Michael Curry, Janet Brunckhorst, Benoît des Ligneris, Ian
Johnson, Nicholas Duran, and Adam Connor.
Quite a few folks from the Design in Product community read early
chapters of this book or otherwise contributed ideas and resources

218 Acknowledgments
to the material. (You can join this community yourself, if you wish.
Just drop by designinproduct.typeform.com/to/H4PqHsVE and
introduce yourself.) These people include (and I apologize if I am
overlooking anyone) Jenn Downs, Ryan Rumsey, Bogdan Stanciu,
Felipe Delgado, Austin Govella, Erin Stratos, Boon Sheridan, Shelby
Bower, Jake Krajewski, Chris Chandler, David LaCroix, Jo Ho, Jeppe
Kruse, Brad Peters, Rebecca Bar, Tania Schlatter, Lukas Bergstrom,
Brian Durkin, Iga Gawronska, Vinish Garg, and Christopher Filkins.
Any mistakes or errors in judgment in this book are mine and
mine alone.
Rosenfeld Media is my kind of publisher, incorporating user
research, strategy, and design into the bones of each book. I was
overjoyed when I realized the topic I had in mind for this book
might be a great fit for their list. I still remember sidling up to Lou
Rosenfeld at my first Information Architecture Summit, in 2006, to
introduce myself, and today I am proud to consider Lou a friend
as well as a colleague. What a treat to get to work with your heroes
and friends!
Everyone I’ve worked with at Rosenfeld is top-notch. Karen Corbett
is a wonderful operations manager. Adeline Crites-Moore takes an
approach to marketing that is in perfect harmony with the ethos of
the press. Jason Shuler takes a thoughtful and inquisitive approach
to social media, imagine that! Danielle Foster did an amazing job
laying this book out. Seriously, flip through the pages and tell me
I’m wrong. She also turned my scribbly stick-figure illustrations into
well-mannered images and diagrams that perfectly complement the
text. The critical work of indexing (Marilyn Augst) and proofreading
(Sue Boshers) a book often get taken for granted, but they are what
distinguish a high-quality reading experience from the sort of stuff
you can find for free everywhere you look. Thank them both!
The astounding, perfect cover art is by Heads of State. I want a full-
sized print!

Acknowledgments 219
My editor, Marta Justak, is the gold standard. She sets the bar. I
don’t think I’ve ever had an editor so in tune with my voice, so
able to encourage me when I needed it, and nudge me along when
I felt stuck. I literally watched this book turn from a messy stream
of consciousness under her hands into the well-wrought narrative
you hold today. Every author should be so lucky.

Dear Reader,
Thanks very much for purchasing this book. There’s a story behind
it and every product we create at Rosenfeld Media.
Since the early 1990s, I’ve been a User Experience consultant, conference
presenter, workshop instructor, and author. (I’m probably best-known
for having cowritten Information Architecture for the Web and Beyond.) In
each of these roles, I’ve been frustrated by the missed opportunities to
apply UX principles and practices.
I started Rosenfeld Media in 2005 with the goal of publishing books
whose design and development showed that a publisher could practice
what it preached. Since then, we’ve expanded into producing industry-
leading conferences and workshops. In all cases, UX has helped us
create better, more successful products—just as you would expect. From
employing user research to drive the design of our books and confer-
ence programs, to working closely with our conference speakers on
their talks, to caring deeply about customer service, we practice what we
preach every day.
Please visit rosenfeldmedia.com to learn more about our confer-
ences, workshops, free communities, and other great resources that
we’ve made for you. And send your ideas, suggestions, and concerns my
way: louis@rosenfeldmedia.com
I’d love to hear from you, and I hope you enjoy the book!
Lou Rosenfeld,
Publisher

a malfunctioning plane, resuscitating a heart attack
ad-on car crash—all require split-second decisions
ath. Fortunately, designers of life-saving products
ch and brain science to help users reduce panic
instincts. Life and Death Design brings these
designers who want to help their users think clearly
nt job of breaking down our stress response, with vivid stories
stems we create can help or hinder at critical times.”
n and Adventures in Experience Design
designs in service to the real world.”
e Chicago
m Swindler’s excellent book, you don’t need to be someone
tremis. You just need to be someone who designs for people
rse, everybody.”
e again and again.”
LIFE AND DE ATH DESIGN
 
by K ATIE S WINDLER
LIFE AND DE ATH DESIGN
What Life-Saving Technology Can Teach
Everyday Designers
by K ATIE S WINDLER foreword by Lisa Baskett
ife-and-death-design/ 
9 781933 820842
90000>
ISBN 978-1-933820-84-2
Surveys That Work explains a seven-step process for designing, running,
and reporting on a survey that gets accurate results. In a no-nonsense
style with plenty of examples about real-world compromises, the book
focuses on reducing the errors that make up Total Survey Error—a key
concept in survey methodology. If you are conducting a survey, this book
is a must-have.
“Caroline has created a must-read ‘one-stop source’ for those looking to conduct a survey.
Read this book—and learn from one of the best.”
LAURA WILSON
Data Quality Hub Lead, UK Office for National Statistics
“If you have avoided using surveys as a tool for understanding the needs of the people who use
your products, shy away no more. This book is a delight to read and use.”
DANA CHISNELL
Policy Designer, U.S. Digital Service
“This is crucial reading for those who want to deepen their user-centered practice with
quantitative research. A thorough exploration of all dimensions of the thinking process behind
good surveys, this book will make you a better questioner!”
MISAKI HATA
Service Designer, NHS Digital
“In an easy-to-read, conversational style, Caroline takes you through the entire process
with wonderful examples, helpful stories, and tons of good advice.”
JANICE (GINNY) REDISH
Author of Letting Go of the Words
Cover Illustration by Jason Kernevich 
l 
Interior Illustrations by Tasia Graham
WRITING IS DESIGNING
 
by MICHA EL J. ME TTS AND ANDY WELFLE
WRITING IS DESIGNING
Words and the User Experience
by MICHA EL J. ME TTS AND ANDY WELFLE
Foreword by Sara Wachter-Boettcher
www.rosenfeldmedia.com
MORE ON SURVEYS THAT WORK
rosenfeldmedia.com/books/surveys-that-work/ 
9 781933 820538
90000>
ISBN 978-1-933820-53-8
SURVE YS THAT WORK
A Practical Guide for Designing and Running Better Surveys
by C AROLINE JARRE TT
Foreword by Steve Krug
SURVE YS THAT WORK
 
by CAROLINE JARRETT
Welcome to the future, where you can talk with the digital things around
you: voice assistants, chatbots, and more. But these interactions can
be unhelpful and frustrating—sometimes even offensive or biased.
Conversations with Things teaches you how to design conversations
that are useful, ethical, and human-centered—because everyone deserves
to be understood, especially you.
“Deibel and Evanhoe teach conversation design using practical, actionable examples, and in
such a way that it’s a delight to read—not just another book that feels like homework.”
CATHY PEARL
Author of Designing Voice User Interfaces
“Witty in tone and full of real-life examples, Conversations with Things thoroughly covers the topic
of conversation design from the basics of prompt-writing to the complexities of multimodal
interactions. I highly recommend this book for experts and novices alike.”
LISA FALKSON
Senior VUI Designer, Amazon
“Conversations with Things is a wonderful resource for designers working with voice. Through-
out the book, Diana and Rebecca lay out a good foundation for designers to create inclusive and
accessible conversations.”
REGINE GILBERT
Author of Inclusive Design for a Digital World, designer and educator
“The UX community finally has a comprehensive but easy-to-read guide to navigate the
nuanced and sometimes messy process of conversation design.”
MARK C. WEBSTER
Director of Voice and Audio Products, Adobe
Cover Illustration by Jason Kernevich 
l 
Interior Illustrations by Olivia Reaney-Hall
CONVERS ATIONS WITH THINGS
 
by DIAN A DEIBEL and REBECC A E VANHOE
CONVERS ATIONS WITH THINGS
UX Design for Chat and Voice
by DIAN A DEIBEL and REBECC A E VANHOE
Foreword by Kat Vellos
www.rosenfeldmedia.com
MORE ON CONVERSATIONS WITH THINGS
https://rosenfeldmedia.com/books/conversations-with-things/ 
9 781933 820262
90000>
ISBN 978-1-933820-26-2
ild a new product. But developing a great
lly want to buy and use is another story.
hands-on, step-by-step guide that helps
y, empathy, design, and analytics into their
’ll learn to develop products and features that
bottom line while dramatically improving
ading for anybody making product decisions.”
oduct (and who isn’t?), Klein is here to help. Build Better Products
meworks, useful exercises, and actionable expert advice.”
anford Graduate School of Business
athetic design thinking and tough business/market analysis to
or understanding customers work for both startups and big
advice, she shows us how to do it, and doesn’t just tell.”
etter-products/
BUILD BE T TER PRODUCTS
 
by Laura K lein
BUILD BET TER PRODUCTS
A Modern Approach to Building Successful
User-Centered Products
by Laura K lein 
Foreword by Scott Berkun
Just as pilots and doctors improve by studying crash reports and
postmortems, experience designers can improve by learning how
customer experience failures cause products to fail in the market-
place. Rather than proselytizing a particular approach to design,
Why We Fail holistically explores what teams actually built, why
the products failed, and how we can learn from the past to avoid
failure ourselves.
“To all the aspiring, young entrepreneurs who are reading this: take heed. Embrace failure to learn
from failure. Learn from failure to avoid failure.”
DON NORMAN
Co-founder, Nielsen Norman Group. Author of The Design of Everyday Things.
“Failure provides a gold mine of insights that can help you do better in the future—and Victor’s book
is a useful guide, with lots of examples that make it clear that you’re not alone in screwing up.”
KAREN MCGRANE
Author of Content Strategy for Mobile
“Success is boring. Failure is much more interesting—and instructive.”
ALEX WRIGHT
Director of User Experience, The New York Times
“Required reading for every product team.”
NEIL WEHRLE
Vice President of User Experience, betaworks
Cover Illustration by John Gall
www.rosenfeldmedia.com
MORE ON WHY WE FAIL
www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/why-we-fail/
W H Y W E F A I L
 
by VICTOR LOMBARDI
W H Y W E FA I L
Learning from Experience Design Failures
by Victor Lombardi Foreword by Don Norman
www.rosenfeldmedia.com
MORE ON SEE WHAT I MEAN
www.rosenfeldmedia.com/books/comics/
S E E W H A T I M E A N
How to Use Comics to Communicate Ideas
by KE VIN CHENG
foreword by Dan Roam
S E E W H A T I M E A N
 
by KE VIN CHENG
If you’re an executive, designer, product manager, marketer, or engineer,
communication is part of your work. Using images and text in unique
ways, comics can engage readers in ways traditional methods can’t.
In See What I Mean, you’ll learn how to create comics about your
products and processes without an illustrator—just like Google, eBay,
and Adobe do.
“A breakthrough book by Kevin Cheng that will soon have you making breakthroughs of your own.
If you care about clear thinking and communication, this book belongs in your library.”
DAVE GRAY
Author of Gamestorming and The Connected Company
“Think you can’t draw? Wish you could? Want to make your personas and scenarios and user stories
much more vivid with pictures? Now you can! Get this book!”
JANICE (GINNY) REDIsH
Author, Letting Go of the Words–Writing Web Content Works
“Even if you are a product manager, in marketing, or an engineering manager who has no aspirations
to learn to cartoon, this book may be even more important to you, since your job may well be all the
more about effective communication.”
BIll BUxTON
Author of Sketching the User Experience
“Kevin’s book is a great resource for designers looking to incorporate storytelling into their workflow.”
JOsHUA BREWER
Principal designer at Twitter
RECENT TITLES FROM ROSENFELD MEDIA
SELECTED TITLES FROM ROSENFELD MEDIA
Get a great discount on a Rosenfeld Media book:
visit rfld.me/deal to learn more.
View our full catalog at rosenfeldmedia.com/books

222
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Christian Crumlish is a product and UX leader-
ship consultant at Design in Product, where
he also hosts a product/UX community. He is
currently leading the product management of
COVID19.CA.GOV and consulting on govtech
product practices with California’s Office of Digital
Innovation. He is also a mentor at Code for America and StartX, and
a fellow in the Rosenfeld Media Experts network. Christian earned
an AB at Princeton in philosophy, where he graduated sine laude.
Formerly, he was VP of Product at 7 Cups, winner of the 2016 Stan-
ford Medicine X Prize for health systems design, and a 2019 World
Economic Forum Pioneer. He has also co-hosted the monthly BayCHI
program, was senior director of product at CloudOn, was director of
messaging products for AOL (AIM), was the last curator of the Yahoo
design pattern library, and served two terms as a director of the late
lamented Information Architecture Institute.
He is the author of the bestselling The Internet for Busy People and The
Power of Many, and co-author of Designing Social Interfaces. Christian
lives in Palo Alto with his wife, Briggs Nisbet, and an ever-growing
collection of ukuleles.

User experience designers and researchers are wrestling with prod-
uct management—as a peer discipline, a job title, a future career—or
simply wondering exactly what it entails. In Product Management for
UX People, Christian Crumlish demystifies product management for UX
practitioners who want to understand, partner with, and even become
product managers.
“This is the book to read if you’re thinking of a career transition from UX to product.”
ELLEN CHISA
Founder in Residence, Boldstart Ventures
“Finally, a book that zooms into the Venn diagram between product management and UX with
day-in-the-life clarity.”
HÀ PHAN
UX designer turned Director of Product
“Too few books think through the synergies as well as complexities of transitioning from UX to
product. Christian’s book explores those nuances and provides a straightforward roadmap of
what skills translate and where there are opportunities to learn a great deal more.”
B. PAGELS-MINOR
Product and thought leader
“Whether you’re a designer considering a career change, or simply want to understand
your product managers better, this book is an exceptional guide to the unique challenges
of the product craft.”
MARTIN ERIKSSON
Co-author, Product Leadership, and co-founder and chairman, Mind the Product
Cover Illustration by Jason Kernevich 
l 
Interior Illustrations by Danielle Foster
www.rosenfeldmedia.com
MORE ON PRODUCT MANAGEMENT FOR UX PEOPLE
https://rosenfeldmedia.com/books/product-management-for-ux-people/ 
9 781933 820712
90000>
ISBN 978-1-933820-71-2